TRANSMEDIA | 


Edited by Marta Boni 


World Building 
Transmedia, Fans, Industries 


Amsterdam 
University 
Press 


World Building 


Transmedia: Participatory Culture and 
Media Convergence 


The book series Transmedia: Participatory Culture and Media Convergence 
provides a platform for cutting-edge research in the field of media studies, with 
a strong focus on the impact of digitization, globalization, and fan culture. The 
series is dedicated to publishing the highest-quality monographs (and exceptional 
edited collections) on the developing social, cultural, and economic practices 
surrounding media convergence and audience participation. The term ‘media 
convergence’ relates to the complex ways in which the production, distribution, 
and consumption of contemporary media are affected by digitization, while 
‘participatory culture’ refers to the changing relationship between media 
producers and their audiences. 


Interdisciplinary by its very definition, the series will provide a publishing 
platform for international scholars doing new and critical research in relevant 
fields. While the main focus will be on contemporary media culture, the 
series is also open to research that focuses on the historical forebears of digital 
convergence culture, including histories of fandom, cross- and transmedia 
franchises, reception studies and audience ethnographies, and critical 
approaches to the culture industry and commodity culture. 


Series editors 
Dan Hassler-Forest, Utrecht University, the Netherlands 
Matt Hills, University of Huddersfield, United Kingdom 


Editorial Board 

— Mark Bould, University of West of England, United Kingdom 

— Timothy Corrigan, University of Pennsylvania, United States 

— Henry Jenkins, University of Southern California, United States 
— Julia Knight, University of Sunderland, United Kingdom 

— Simone Murray, Monash University, Australia 

— Roberta Pearson, University of Nottingham, United Kingdom 

— John Storey, University of Sunderland, United Kingdom 

— William Uricchio, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, United States 
— Sherryl Vint, University of California, Riverside, United States 
- Eckart Voigts, Braunschweig Institute of Technology, Germany 


World Building 


Transmedia, Fans, Industries 


Edited by 
Marta Boni 


Amsterdam University Press 


The publication of this book is made possible by a grant from Fonds de recherche du Québec 
— Société et culture (FRQSC) 


Cover illustration: Camille Chameau Martinez, from The Ambassadors, by Hans Holbein the 


Younger. 


Cover design: Codrdesign, Leiden 
Lay-out: Crius Group, Hulshout 


Amsterdam University Press English-language titles are distributed in the US and Canada by 
the University of Chicago Press. 


ISBN 978 90 8964 756 6 
e-ISBN 978 90 4852 5317 

DOI 10.5117/9789089647566 
NUR 670 


© M. Boni / Amsterdam University Press B.V., Amsterdam 2017 


All rights reserved. Without limiting the rights under copyright reserved above, no part of 
this book may be reproduced, stored in or introduced into a retrieval system, or transmitted, 
in any form or by any means (electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording or otherwise) 


without the written permission of both the copyright owner and the author of the book. 


Every effort has been made to obtain permission to use all copyrighted illustrations 
reproduced in this book. Nonetheless, whosoever believes to have rights to this material is 


advised to contact the publisher. 


Table of Contents 


Introduction 9 
Worlds, Today 
Marta Boni 


Section 1 Theories of World Building 


1. The Aesthetics of Proliferation 31 
Marie-Laure Ryan 


2. Building Science-Fiction Worlds 47 
Paolo Bertetti 


3. “He Doesn’t Look Like Sherlock Holmes” 62 
The Truth Value and Existential Status of Fictional Worlds and their 
Characters 


Julien Lapointe 


4. “Visible World” 77 
The Atlas as a Visual Form of Knowledge and Narrative Paradigm in 
Contemporary Art 

Cristina Baldacci 


Section 2 Economies of World Building 


5. A World of Disney 93 
Building a Transmedia Storyworld for Mickey and his Friends 
Matthew Freeman 


6. World-Building Logics and Copyright 109 
The Dark Knight and the Great Detective 
Roberta Pearson 


7. Battleworlds 129 
The Management of Multiplicity in the Media Industries 
Derek Johnson 


8. Platform Producer Meets Game Master 
On the Conditions for the Media Mix 
Marc Steinberg 


g. Narrative Ecosystems 
A Multidisciplinary Approach to Media Worlds 
Veronica Innocenti and Guglielmo Pescatore 
Section3 Immersion 
10. The Building and Blurring of Worlds 
Sound, Space, and Complex Narrative Cinema 


Justin Horton 


11. Beyond Immersion 


Absorption, Saturation, and Overflow in the Building of Imaginary 


Worlds 
Mark J.P. Wolf 


12. Zombie Escape and Survival Plans 
Mapping the Transmedial World of the Dead 


Bernard Perron 


13. MMORPG as Locally Realized Worlds of Action 
Laurent Di Filippo 


Section 4 Media as World-Building Devices 


14. The Worries of the World(s) 
Cartoons and Cinema 
Karen Redrobe (formerly Beckman) 


15. Linguistic Terrain and World Time 
Chinese Media Theories and Their World Imaginations 


Victor Fan 


143 


164 


204 


215 


231 


253 


272 


16. The Worlds Align 
Media Convergence and Complementary Storyworlds in Marvel's 
Thor: The Dark World 
Dru Jeffries 


17. World Building and Metafiction in Contemporary Comic Books 
Metalepsis and Figurative Process of Graphic Fiction 
Denis Mellier 


Section5 Appropriations and Fan Practices 


18. The Monster at the End of This Book 
Metalepsis, Fandom, and World Making in Contemporary TV Series 


Valentina Re 


19. Traversing the “Whoniverse” 
Doctor Who’s Hyperdiegesis and Transmedia Discontinuity/ 
Diachrony 
Matt Hills 


20. Transmediaphilia, World Building, and the Pleasures of the 
Personal Digital Archive 
Jim Collins 


21. The Politics of World Building 
Heteroglossia in Janelle Monde’s Afrofuturist WondaLand 


Dan Hassler-Forest 


Index 


287 


304 


321 


343 


362 


377 


393 


Introduction 
Worlds, Today 


Marta Boni 


Boni, Marta (ed.), World Building. Transmedia, Fans, Industries. Amster- 
dam University Press, 2017 


DOI: 10.5117/9789089647566/INTRO 


As the camera rotates, the rings of an astrolabe bearing a sun at its cen- 
tre appear on the screen. In a brief glimpse, the rings display detailed 
engravings: scenes of war, dragons defeating an army, the symbols of the 
Great Houses of Westeros and their animal sigils—a wolf, a stag, a lion, 
a bear. Then, following the oscillatory movement of the astrolabe, the 
camera descends onto a map, disclosing castles and temples within cities, 
towering statues and mountains, and the Wall: all progressively pop up 
three-dimensionally, bringing into view natural features of earth and ice, 
and the exquisitely crafted materials of wood, copper, iron, and stone. The 
opening credits of the adventure-fantasy saga Game of Thrones (HBO 2011-) 
are a moveable map, covering the territories in which the series’ events 
take place. Such a map orients the viewer to the changing trajectories 
of the various characters, evoking the spaces central to the constantly 
evolving war for the Iron Throne. It visually gathers a complex multitude 
of dispersed elements. Also, it is a serial map—it changes according to 
the transformations the fictional world has undergone throughout each 
season. Its seriality echoes the proliferation of fan-made maps that fill 
the Internet, which, at times, offer even greater detail and insight than 
the original. 

Mapping practices, and, more specifically, the use of a map as an official 
paratext—title credits—underline the relevance of space for media content 
producers and users today. Worlds—as imaginary territories and perennial, 
collectively built, semiotic realms—are necessary for the understanding of 
media creation and for the interpretive processes it stimulates. In fact, the 
tendency to read the contemporary media landscape in terms of fluidity 
or fragmentation is, by all means, balanced by the growing relevance of 
aggregation, serialization, and franchising phenomena. 


10 WORLD BUILDING 


On the one hand, sprawling narratives, maximized customizability, 
and the increased visibility of sharing practices, including remixes and 
mash-ups, have come to play a crucial role in media studies. Henry 
Jenkins, Sam Ford, and Joshua Green researched the spread of media 
content as it travels across digital networks, where it finds a new home in 
a multiplicity of sites, often unforeseen by the original creators (Jenkins 
et al. 2013). Francesco Casetti describes how film and television leave 
their original media to find new screens, new devices, and new uses 
(2015). However, within this process of expansion, it is still important to 
draw attention to the horizons of the concept of medium: for example, 
for Casetti, film as a medium seems to keep its identity in spite of frag- 
mentation, because of its high perceptive intensity or the high cognitive 
involvement it requires. 

On the other hand, this fragmentation is complemented by a ubiquitous 
tendency toward the gathering of dispersed parts. This is where imaginary 
worlds stand as a mainstay of media creation. Worlds as artificial con- 
structions are also dependent upon their explorers who, in turn, become 
world-builders. Today, the creation of official guides, viewers’ reactions 
on Twitter or Facebook, extended critiques on blogs or discussion boards, 
user-generated topographic maps and infographics all highlight the need 
to make sense of complex narratives by interacting with them. Tran- 
scending individual perspectives and localized exploration possibilities, 
a world is built by networks of speculations, interpretations, and social 
uses, thus becoming a shared worldview. Along these lines, Michael Saler 
(2012) highlights a switch from “imagined” to “imaginary” and then to 


“virtual” worlds in the late 19 


century, a period that witnesses new ways 
for audiences to inhabit immersive realms, for example, with Sherlock 
Holmes’s serial narratives, thus blurring the boundaries between reality 
and fiction. 

Game of Thrones’ opening credits can be considered a contemporary 
Achilles’ shield. Before a critical battle, Hephaestus, the craftsman of the 
gods, builds new armor for the strongest warrior, including a wonderfully 
made shield, that is detailed in one of the most suggestive sequences of 
the Iliad (book XVIII, v. 478-607), where the narration stops in order to 
give a long description or ekphrasis of the artwork. The shield offers a 
visual representation of the world of the time, organized in concentric 
circles: Earth, Sea, Sun, and constellations; cities, rituals, and wars; farming, 
breeding, winemaking, crafts, and dances... the totality of “the real,” or 
a condensed and shared knowledge. The shield, like any fictional map, 
therefore functions potentially as a “tribal encyclopedia” (Havelock 1963) 


INTRODUCTION 11 


that allows participants to extrapolate meaning not only from an imaginary 
world, but also from their own society. 


Builders, Architects, Explorers 


Alternative, fantastic, or futuristic realms and characters that provide an 
immersive experience have become privileged objects in many fields of 
research. World building has become a model for rethinking media and, 
more broadly, storytelling. According to Henry Jenkins: 


More and more, storytelling has become the art of world building, as 
artists create compelling environments that cannot be fully explored or 
exhausted within a single work or even a single medium. The world is 
bigger than the film, bigger even than the franchise—since fan specula- 
tions and elaborations also expand the worlds in a variety of directions 
(Jenkins 2006, p.116). 


A quick online search shows the existence of guides for world-builders, such 
as Fundamentals of World Building (Verino 2010), or The Planet Construction 
Kit (Rosenfelder 2010), and the many Reddit threads that detail all the steps 
necessary for world building. As Mark J.P. Wolf states, building imaginary 
worlds has always been an intrinsically human activity. Quoting research in 
the field of psychology, Wolf emphasizes the idea of world building as a sta- 
ple in children’s creative play (see also: the more recent Root-Bernstein 2014). 
Following the example of J.R.R. Tolkien, Wolf describes imaginary worlds 
(e.g. mythical worlds, utopias or dystopias, projected or self-made worlds) as 
“subcreations” or “secondary worlds”, inhabited by their creators and users 
(2012). Michael Saler shows a more specific shift in world-building practices 
that become more significant within what he calls a “larger cultural project 
of the West: that of re-enchanting an allegedly disenchanted world’ (2012, 
6), giving rise to “new public spheres of imagination” during the fin de siécle 
period (Saler 2012, 17). Such practices have become a transversal tendency, 
particularly attuned to media creation and consumption activities typical of 
Western societies. Following the convergence trend and the proliferation of 
big media corporations in recent years, as well as a more sustained academic 
interest in pop culture and fan practices, a noteworthy world-building 
scholarship is currently growing across the globe. Many researchers have 
started to explore the concept of world building and employ it in narrative 
theory, stressing the relevance of building practices in storytelling (Ryan 


12 WORLD BUILDING 


2013, Lavocat 2010, Besson 2015, Alexander 2013, see also the journal Story- 
worlds) or exploring the ontology of fictional characters (Eder, Jannidis, 
and Schneider 2010). Media specificities are underlined in works within 
the fieldwork of transmedia storytelling (Dena 2009; Jenkins 2006; Wolf 
2012; Ryan and Thon 2014; Scolari, Bertetti, and Freeman 2014; Ravy and 
Forcier 2014; Freeman 2016). Also, world building is traditionally studied in 
science-fiction literature and film (Saler 2012, Boillat 2014), as well as game 
studies (Castronova 2005). More recently, the journal Participations devoted 
a special section to world-building practices in fan cultures. Through case 
studies, the publication also tackles Wolf’s distinction between primary 
and secondary worlds (Proctor and McCulloch 2016). 

Taking into account such abundant scholarship, worlds cannot simply 
be studied as objects, but must be utilized as keys to “unlocking” the 
contemporary media landscape. The essays collected in this volume offer 
in-depth investigations of the wide-ranging phenomenon of world building, 
using various disciplinary approaches and heterogeneous objects. This 
book’s most distinctive contribution is to underline the complicity between 
worlds and media by taking into account theoretical models, economic and 
industrial strategies, stylistic elements, and fan uses. Media can be defined 
here as ever-mutating alliances of technological settings and sociocultural 
uses, which have to be conceived not only as instruments of world transmis- 
sion, as in top-down media channels, but also as tools that contribute to 
the active and participatory building of worlds. When taking up such a 
challenge, we need to delve deeper into the analysis of theoretical models 
used to understand world building, both as a practice and as a tool. 

In order to interpret the complexity of world-building practices, a trans- 
versal approach will be used, able to stress interactions between distant 
phenomena and to consider their short-term or long-term effects. From 
an epistemological viewpoint, the larger emergence of world building 
is linked to a systemic and complex organization of thinking, which is 
particularly relevant in a time of media fragmentation. According to the 
French philosopher Edgar Morin, a paradigm of complexity is required when 
scientific discoveries allow disorder and chaos to emerge. A pathway paved 
by complex thinking leads to a knowledge of media that is not restricted 
to “probable” results, and that is capable of following mutations, as well 
as homeostatic trends: “[a] chaotic process may obey deterministic initial 
states, but these cannot be known exhaustively, and the interactions de- 
veloped within this process alter any prevision. Negligible variations have 
considerable consequences over large time scales” (Morin 2007, 4). Similarly, 
given the proliferation of narrative and non-narrative chunks of media 


INTRODUCTION 13 


content, heterogeneous bricks that constitute complex systems, determin- 
ism proves an inadequate approach for understanding such phenomena. 
Against determinism, a multi-focal, transnational, and interdisciplinary 
perspective is required in order to establish the relationships between 
worlds, media, production, and cultures. Worlds will be studied as a way to 
re-examine media theories, as objects to be understood in their industrial, 
creative genesis, their formal characteristics, and, finally, as spaces that 
emerge from the interaction of industry and fandom. 

Worlds can be considered forms of knowledge and forms of life. On the 
one hand, complex world building is a common practice in the current 
media landscape. Scholars build instruments to describe fictional worlds 
and display their complexity; diegetic spaces, transmedia phenomena, film 
franchises, and serial narratives are objects of study. Structural questions 
emerge concerning the longevity and success of an expanding world over 
time; logical problems appear related to the coexistence of heterogeneous 
entities when many worlds collide; aesthetic, technological, and cultural 
issues surface where various authorial practices interact. On the other hand, 
worldness can be thought of as a metaphor or a model; it can be a key to 
understanding media industries, audiences, and the intertwining of the two. 
In this case, worlds are springboards and catalysts allowing the formation 
of certain linguistic and cultural systems typical of the convergence era. A 
world is a form of life dependent on individuals and, at the same time, an 
aggregator of communities. Here, the term “world” also evokes a worldview: 
a way of conceiving and building conventions within a certain time period, 
according to a specific domain of knowledge and professional labor (see: 
Becker's Art Worlds 1984). This concept covers technological devices, as well 
as institutions, ideological apparatuses, and sociocultural organizations, 
each within its own context. As a canon (think of “Tarantino’s world”), it is 
dependent upon historical, cultural, and social contexts. What emerges is 
a system of references, as well as a source for the extraction of material to 
be transferred into other worlds, particularly when they are shared across 
cultures and nations. 


Complex Spaces 


One of the bases for understanding world-building practices is the idea of 
a more or less organized sum of scattered parts, as in complex systems. 
The spatial dimension is particularly relevant for the description of this 
phenomenon. The concept of space can be found in film theory as an 


14 WORLD BUILDING 


important correspondent to the notion of time. The unfolding of territories 
or spaces while reading a novel or watching a film is a compelling experi- 
ence for participants (Eco 1984); it invites them to forget the medium’s 
materiality and immerse themselves in a different reality. At the inception 
of film studies, Etienne Souriau coined the term diegesis, describing a 
flexible environment that could contain infinite variations (1953). For this 
reason, an interrogation of worlds must include the multiple combinations 
of media forms, along with the effects they produce, consequently encour- 
aging an anti-essentialism and an anti-textualism. In the framework of 
possible-world theory, Thomas Pavel considers literary texts irreducible 
to their linguistic dimension (1986). Furthermore, it is more compelling 
to study “ontological landscapes” that compose “the world view of a given 
community” (Pavel 1986, 139). In fact, one of the debates at the core of 
games studies is the analysis of interfaces as structures that are separate 
from their narratological perspective. For ludologist Jasper Juul, “a game 
cues the player into imagining its fictional world”, demonstrating that the 
player has the choice between two positions: to see the game as a set of 
rules or as a set of suggestions. Either can be used to imagine a world (Juul 
2005, 1). In such situations, for some scholars, it is less interesting to analyse 
textual and intertextual borrowings than to identify the boundaries of 
an overarching “fiction” that englobes more than one novel, comic, game, 
film, or television show. A concept coming from literary studies, but also 
useful for transmedial phenomena, transfiction is a tool used to describe 
situations such as when authors other than Sir Arthur Conan Doyle or 
Flaubert take characters such as Sherlock Holmes or Emma Bovary out 
of their original texts and place them into alternative lives, new futures, 
or unlikely encounters (Saint-Gelais 2011, Ryan 2013). Again, the concept 
of a space emerges here, allowing various, logical, or even contradictory 
outcomes: such a virtual space is, in fact, able to incorporate, for the 
consumer’s delight, as many details as the actual world—and more. 

If, on the one hand, filmmakers have learned to build more and more 
tangible worlds; on the other, during the technological progression from 
VCR, to DVR, TiVo, DVD, and Blu-ray, viewers have been increasingly en- 
couraged to stop, review, and compare details. According to David Bordwell, 
a film like Blade Runner, which came out in 1982, is emblematic of the 
practice of “layering worlds”. Because of its continuities—its “minutiae” and 
“information overload’”—viewers equipped with a VCR were able to observe 
details dispersed throughout the movie (Bordwell 2006, 58). Visual details, 
both “functional” and “indicial’”, to use Roland Barthes’s terminology, always 
contribute to the consistency of a world, helping viewers to familiarize 


INTRODUCTION 15 


themselves with it. They “furnish” an environment, as Umberto Eco states 
in reference to cult texts (Eco 1986, 3). Such details function as “world ef- 
fects [...] that make the text look like the world—open, heterogeneous, 
incomplete” (Moretti 1996, 59). Moreover, a world’s sumptuousness provides 
for the recognition of details as a part of a collective game (Eco 1986, 3, 4, 
6). Such details are also the source of a self-reflexive pleasure. 

Similarly, a world’s details may erupt beyond the limits of a specific 
medium. In fact, paratextuality has evolved into a complex process, intro- 
ducing innovation to the many fields of audiovisual creation, distribution, 
and reception (Gray 2010). Along with DVD covers, posters, trailers, and 
traditional thresholds to a text, it is easy to note the upsurge of objects 
coming from fictional worlds in real life, like Banana Republic’s Mad Men- 
inspired line of clothing. Far from mere ornamentation, such accessories 
are extractable elements of rich imaginary realms, which establishes their 
coherence and persistence. Moreover, as foreseen by Janet Murray in her 
1997 book Hamlet on the Holodeck, it is now easy to find digital “hy perserial” 
phenomena that enrich a show’s complexity: websites, social networks, and 
constellations of online platforms. 

Any medium intended as either a set of devices or material channel de- 
livering a specific content, can be thought of asa single chunk participating, 
among others, in the co-construction of a world. Several terms have been 
proposed: transmedia supersystems (Kinder 1991); transmedia storytelling 
(Jenkins 2006); and transmedial worlds (Klastrup and Tosca 2004, see also: 
Ryan and Thon, 2014, 14-15). Not only has the term transmedia entered the 
common vernacular of scholars across disciplines (see also: Kinder and 
McPherson 2014), but the industry is adopting its precepts in various domains. 
Storytellers produce their own guides (Phillips, 2012, Pratten, 2011, Bernardo, 
2011 and 2014), inviting creators to concoct complex worlds displaying several 
networked bricks. These creations carry with them “an entertainment brand 
that can grow into a pop icon, a brand whose story world or hero has enough 
creative potential to power spin-offs and reboots, theme park rides and acres 
of merchandise” (Bernardo 2014, Introduction, n.p.). 

Jenkins famously describes transmedia storytelling through the example 
of the Matrix franchise, in which films, comics, anime, and video games 
were designed to be part of the same itinerary, often intersecting, yet always 
providing the viewer with a more complete experience if grasped together: 


The Wachowski brothers built a playground where other artists could 
experiment and fans could explore. For this work, the brothers had to 
envision the world of The Matrix with sufficient consistency that each 


16 WORLD BUILDING 


instalment is recognizably part of the whole and with enough flexibility 
that it can be rendered in all of these different styles of representation— 
from the photorealistic computer animation of Final Flight of the Osiris 
to the blocky graphics of the first Matrix web game. (Jenkins 2006, 113) 


But such a transmedial creative model is not reducible to the phenomenon of 
media stacking, nor to the “networking” of narratives, since neither of these 
is new: both have always engaged readers and consumers in their own right. 
In fact, Biblical narratives are dispersed across the world, found in stained- 
glass windows and frescoes, in paintings and performances. Also, popular 
culture has always been the source of multiple adaptations within comics, 
novels, film, and television (see, for example: Scolari et al. 2014). Indeed, 
the relevance of current transmedia storytelling is related to the higher 
visibility of its components and their interconnections, thus highlighting, 
again, the relevance of the notion of complexity. Transmedia world building 
is comparable to the intertwining of many different threads forming a cloth: 
the sum of each can never be equivalent to their interrelation. As in the 
hermeneutic circle, we cannot know the parts if we do not know the whole; 
at the same time, we cannot know the whole if we do not know the parts. 
In the transmedia creative model, consumers are granted a main role: 
they are allowed to explore these complex worlds and are encouraged to 
add content. Still, transmedia labyrinths are, by definition, bridled. The 
Matrix example is “a unified and coordinated entertainment experience” 
(Jenkins 2006). Created as an organized and mostly fenced-in playground, 
its interactivity is designed beforehand and, consequently, users have 
limited freedom. Interactive practices raise the level of complexity in Al- 
ternate Reality Games (ARG), those “games which are not games”, such as 
the famous Why So Serious? (2007) advertising campaign that accompanied 
the launch of The Dark Knight. In innovative, boundary-blurring scavenger 
hunts, fans had to follow clues found in their hometowns in order to find 
artifacts from the story. In this case, worlds break the boundaries of fiction 
and enter the viewer's reality. Not only are media worlds comparable to 
heterotopias, or portals to immersive alternative spaces that help a society 
understand its limits and build its identity (Foucault 1984 [1967]), they can 
also be understood within the framework of the “hypertopia’, a term coined 
by Francesco Casetti. According to Casetti, “[w]e no longer move for film; 
it is now something we acquire, we meet by chance, or we pick out from a 
range of available products; it is something that offers up a world ready to 
extend itself everywhere” (Casetti 2015, 148). In fact, fragments of a world 
overflow in the viewers’ own realms, like when players of an Alternate 


INTRODUCTION 17 


Reality Game stumble upon scattered artifacts or clues (fictional worlds, 
then, truly become “places that one happens upon along the way,” Casetti 
2015, 144). Also, such boundary-breaking experiences challenge a world’s 
identity, exposing it to clashes with divergent uses and, thereby, proving 
its resilience. 

Still, the elements of transmedia storytelling all too often remain part 
of a designed, top-down experience. Commercial transmedia worlds are 
often built upon a deterministic vision, and remain contained by “story- 
telling tyrannical characteristics”, as emphasized by Bordwell (2009). A 
distinction has to be made between transmedia as artificial machines 
and worlds as living machines. Concerning complex system theory, Edgar 
Morin writes: 


Von Neumann established the difference between living machines and 
artificial machines produced by technology: the components of the tech- 
nical machines, having the good quality of being extremely reliable, go 
towards their degradation, towards their wear, from the very start of their 
operation. Whereas the living machine, made up mainly by components 
far from reliable, degrading proteins—and one understands very well that 
this lack of reliability of proteins makes it possible to reconstitute them 
non-stop—is able to be regenerated and repaired; it also goes towards 
death, but after a process of development. The key of this difference lies 
in the capacity of self-repair and self-regeneration. The word regeneration 
is capital here. (Morin 2007,13) 


As fan scholars know, the word regeneration is also essential to the Dr. 
Who series, which, as Matt Hills has shown, is a very particular world, able 
to prove its resilience and to survive, mainly thanks to its fans, for over 
50 years. Therefore, another important way to study transmedia involves 
world building as a result of distinct audience activities: worlds lived in 
by users, worlds as living machines. Viewers can be thought of as trace 
generators, whose activity means something for other viewers and can 
influence their experience. 

For Nelson Goodman, “[w]orldmaking as we know it always starts from 
worlds already in hand; the making is remaking” (1978, 6). Fan cultures 
can be studied as activators of worlds. In his definition of transmedia, 
Carlos A. Scolari (2009) also includes non-fictional components, such as 
social network posts, fan art, and discussion boards. Users are explorers 
as well as map-builders, who provide their own contributions to the 
expansion ofa world, operating alone or together with fan communities. 


18 WORLD BUILDING 


In a time when digital networks bring about more visibility to fan 
practices, worlds have become more visible too, stemming from the 
networks of convergent operations constructed by industries and fans. 
The notions of grassroots marketers (Jenkins 2006), fanboy auteurs (Scott 
2012), transmedia fandom (Stein and Busse 2012), and digital fandom 
(Booth 2010; 2015) underline a form of world-building complexity very 
specific to our age: the intertwining of industrial and fan practices. In 
a media convergence context, derivative practices, textual poaching, 
participatory culture, and sharing activities can also complement official 
marketing strategies. 

Each media brick (official or fan-made) is a mini-world, a piece 
contributing to the constitution of a larger entity. Interest in the no- 
tion of worlds therefore seems to reside in the need to conceptualize 
a transcendent substrate, to which each of the texts refers. Media 
fragments, coming from localized spaces and origins, enter the world 
bearing the language and the interpretation bestowed by its producer. 
Eventually, the sum of different uses and interpretations creates a result 
that exceeds the original work—in size, in shape, and in its intentions 
and directions—thereby creating a complex world. Some fragments 
from the periphery manage to join the center, where they are fully 
integrated and eventually become canon. Often, some fan practices 
increase in value and visibility, forcing producers to recognize them 
and include them in the canon. Certainly, this is often accompanied by 
conflict between grassroots activities and licensed works, as examples 
of ownership issues from the hybrid contexts of fan fiction demonstrate 
(Fifty Shades of Grey, first a work of Twilight fan fiction, then a fictional 
world of its own, and the platform Amazon Kindle Worlds prove the 
corporate interest in capitalizing on fan productivity). For these reasons, 
worlds emerge as both a project and as a result. 

Two ways of considering transmedia phenomena are possible: first, 
mixing business and design stresses the predictability ofa world’s develop- 
ment; the other highlights semiotic processes that evolve for years after the 
apparition of a matrix text. The former is inclusive, centripetal, and marked 
by the need to balance unity and order, typical of storytelling, with users’ 
accessibility. The latter is centrifugal, and open to unpredictable results 
that exceed and dilate the borders of a system, which, as a result, calls for 
intersectional instruments in order to grasp how it mutates over time. The 
study of worlds favors a synergetic and systemic approach to intermedial 
and transmedial relationships, each with its specificities often functioning 
as catalyzers. Within this framework, it is impossible to limit the research 


INTRODUCTION 19 


to one field of study: according to Morin, complexity is “invisible in the 
disciplinary division of the real” (Morin 2007, 2). A plurality of perspectives 
and methodologies should be considered in order to examine how the 
problem of world building is relevant in various contexts and in various 
disciplines. 


A Systemic Perspective 


In light ofsuch premises, this book aims to understand better worlds as forms 
of knowledge, as well as forms of life. Essays written by 22 scholars from a 
variety of fields study world building as a transversal practice contained 
within the arenas of production, distribution, storytelling, and reception, 
and the constant negotiations within them. Such a global undertaking is 
organized around five sections, each containing different contributions 
and viewpoints that explore the multifarious dimensions of world building: 
theories, economy, the notion of immersion, the relevance of world building 
across domains, genres and cultures, and social uses. 

The first section, Theories of World Building, analyses world building 
as a key to understanding the media landscape as studied in narratol- 
ogy, philosophy, and art history. The notion is extended in order to cover 
all its meanings, from its more recent use in transmedia storytelling to 
the description of cosmogonic projects in contemporary art. In the first 
chapter, through the example of Cloud Atlas, Marie-Laure Ryan studies 
the cultural phenomenon of transmedia storytelling, analysing the full 
range of relationships between texts, worlds, and stories. These relation- 
ships include a world with many stories, a text (or story) with many worlds, 
and many different texts of varying media converging within the same 
world. From the viewpoint of semiotics, Paolo Bertetti studies fantasy/ 
science fiction as a structural and thematic framework for constructing 
story worlds that cross multiple media. Such solid tools help us to define 
more clearly the links between structure, genres, and aesthetic features 
of worlds emerging in today’s landscape, including the analysis of the 
content of media franchises. Within such a framework of interconnections 
between worlds, various issues appear. For example, the relationship with 
complex characters is extremely intricate. Julien Lapointe’s chapter delves 
more deeply into the research of epistemological tools for understanding 
characters that cross the boundaries of many words, including ours, like 
patently non-existing objects, ranging from unicorns and centaurs to 
round-squares, and Sherlock Holmes. The concept of worlds proves useful 


20 WORLD BUILDING 


as a conceptual arena, drawing for the work of logics and possible worlds 
theories. This section on media theories stresses the relevance of worlds as 
theoretical tools allowing descriptions of overlapping entities and providing 
examples of practices consisting of aggregating scattered fragments: as a 
conclusion of this section, from the field of contemporary art, Cristina 
Baldacci traces the evolution of a world-related mapping phenomenon 
of knowledge, the “atlas form”. Since Aby Warburg’s Bilderatlas, the atlas 
is a way to reconsider the organization of contemporary knowledge. The 
approach of some contemporary artists is described as characterized by a 
montage of visual fragments: grid arrangement; simultaneous views of the 
singular and the plural; non-hierarchical relationships among elements; 
heterogeneity, open structures, intertextuality; and a desire for wholeness. 

The second section explores the economic dimensions of world building, 
as it is devoted to the analysis of the actors, strategies, and tactics (both 
industrial and grassroots, more and more marked by a tendency towards 
transmedial proliferation) involved in the building of fictional universes. 
By incorporating some of the work on franchising and licensing, Matthew 
Freeman explores the building of The Walt Disney Company transmedia 
storyworlds during the 1920s and 1930s, a period characterized by the rise 
of consumer culture in America, and analyses their intertextual, as well as 
their reflexive, dimensions. Indeed, worlds are not only spaces of narrative 
elaboration; they are sites shared by media professionals who utilize their 
resources to form collaborative relationships with one another. Roberta 
Pearson explores the industrial rules that lie beyond the existence of “float- 
ing signifier[s]’ (Uricchio and Pearson 1991), such as Sherlock Holmes or 
Batman, utilizing both legal perspectives and narrative theory. This essay 
demonstrates how the concept of character, and even the role of the author, 
is highly elusive, as worlds necessarily “rest upon legal and business practices 
that create, sustain and protect them”. Yet, it is important to understand 
that different elements converge and intersect within worlds, but also that 
they create frictions with one another, in accordance with complex systems 
theory. From the viewpoint of production studies, Derek Johnson highlights 
the importance of the concept of media “struggle”. His essay focuses on the 
practices of media franchising, looks beyond the construction of cohesive 
and branded narrative spaces, highlighting the struggle between media 
industries and stakeholders regarding these constructions. In another 
context, focussing again on media aggregation, the necessity of a solid, 
cohesive commercial basis for media mix production can be highlighted. 
Marc Steinberg describes the relevance of the role of Game Master and 
Platform Producer in Japan, with the example of Kadokawa Books in the 


INTRODUCTION 21 


1980s and the 1990s. Here, a world stems from a strong individual project, 
collaboratively developed across media within a specific industrial system. 
Alternatively, different types of worlds’ growing can be taken into ac- 
count: for example, those narratives that are not specifically planned to 
cross multiple media, but that become significantly sizable worlds thanks 
to their longevity. Guglielmo Pescatore and Veronica Innocenti tackle the 
concept of “vast narratives”, used to describe television programs charac- 
terized by continuous replicability, an open structure, and a permanent 
expandability. Their developing process employs methods from various 
disciplines, including television studies and information architecture. 
The third section, Immersion, focuses on the intertwining components 
and forms of imaginary worlds across several domains: media, film, and 
video games studies, along with sociology. World-building theories and 
contemporary creation practices are explored, as many elements merge in 
the construction of filmic worlds. As Justin Horton shows, sound plays a 
crucial role, providing a degree of realism to an image that would otherwise 
appear removed from the “real world’—dialogue and sound effects create 
a more perfect mimetic representation of life. Sound is not simply used in 
the construction ofa single world, but of many worlds, each multiplied and 
layered on top of one another. World building is then to be considered as a 
possibility for creators and producers that want to develop a very particular 
experience for consumers. Some models of imaginary universes can be 
defined through notions such as immersion, gaming, non-linear storytell- 
ing, and interactivity. Mark J.P. Wolf’s essay starts with the premise that the 
experience of imaginary worlds can produce various types of immersion: 
physical, perceptual, and conceptual. Using the metaphors of absorption, 
saturation, and overflow, he highlights what lies beyond immersion, 
studying the effects of each of these stages on a world’s audience. Also, he 
describes how world-makers actively use these processes to enhance the 
experience of a world, increasing the illusion of completeness and consist- 
ency, luring audiences back to their worlds. Pursuing the examination of 
immersive realms, Bernard Perron analyses the spatial dimension of the 
experience in transmedia work, namely zombie fiction. He addresses the 
attraction of spatial constructs that draw individuals, again and again, 
to a designed complex world. He also considers the intense motivation 
of moving through space as a character/player, like running through the 
varied media forms of Resident Evil and The Walking Dead. In transmedia 
storytelling, immersion is an ongoing phenomenon that unfolds, mutating, 
over time, across various sets of experiences. Laurent Di Filippo addresses 
how immersion manifests itself in gaming by applying Erving Goffman’s 


22 WORLD BUILDING 


“action places” theory to his analysis of a MMORPG (Massively Multi-player 
Online Role-Playing Game). 

Worldness, intended as a form of knowledge, is also a key to unlocking 
some of the specificities of different forms and genres found in contempo- 
rary media cultures. In the fourth section, Media as World-Building Devices, 
various media and genres characteristic of popular culture are examined 
through the lens of world building: animation, film franchises, comic 
books, and science fiction. Examining animation from the perspective 
of world building, Karen Redrobe (formerly Beckman) maps the contours 
of the debates about what she calls worlding in cinema and media theory, 
highlighting why these debates become particularly relevant at specific 
historical moments. Early theories about animation prove an important 
field for understanding worldness within the discipline of film studies 
and they raise crucial questions that are pertinent to the contemporary 
phenomena that we face today. Expanding the notion of worlds as linguis- 
tic and semiotic domains, Victor Fan’s essay describes a key conceptual 
framework that shapes the debate in Chinese academic studies of media, 
yuyjing, or linguistic terrain. This term indicates overlapping and, at times 
mutually contested, linguistic environments that require remediation. Fan 
addresses this “global gift-exchanging” economy and the need to theorize 
the role of media in shaping such worlds from an historical, geopolitical, 
and culturo-linguistic approach. 

Another essential notion, convergence, appears as a key term for under- 
standing media as world-building devices. Dru Jeffries analyses Marvel 
Studios’ Thor franchise, showing that today’s convergences—between 
analog and digital technologies across the entire contemporary media 
ecology—inform not only the conditions of production, marketing, and 
distribution of superhero blockbusters, but their narratives as well. Conclud- 
ing this section, Denis Mellier works on metalepsis in comic books. As he 
argues, metalepsis strengthens the illusionism and creates an effect of 
“real presence” in the fictional worlds represented within a narrative. This 
exposure of narrativity and fictionality appeals strongly to readers in the 
current media landscape. It could also be considered, retrospectively, as a 
new departure point to make the notion of immersion, seen in the preceding 
section, more complex. 

Transmedia worlds are forms of life, or spheres of discourse, inhabited by 
their users. As a result, it is possible to speak from a pragmatic point of view 
of “cult worlds’, or narrative worlds fashioned by audiences. The last section 
is centered on appropriations and fan practices, and explores theories and 
methodologies for the study of audiences in the new media ecology. 


INTRODUCTION 23 


The discussion pertaining to the value of metalepsis proves pertinent when 
describing the relationship between worlds and audiences. Valentina Re stud- 
ies television series that systematically use metaleptical strategies to mix the 
worlds of comics, TV, and cinema. Keeping up with the analysis of television 
series and their audiences, the following chapter examines Doctor Who, which 
first aired in1963, a very potent example of the intertwining of grassroots and 
industrial processes. Matt Hills describes it as a “rickety” world: its survival 
over the years happened almost completely by accident. Despite some tension 
and friction, fan cultures built it as a space and as a “fan brand”. 

Fandom is a cultural practice that builds, maintains, or transforms worlds. 
It is interesting to understand how some of the defining features of such a 
cultural practices change over time, being mainly related to technological 
devices. Such a perspective is offered by Jim Collins, who describes world 
building by stressing its pragmatic nature, as a taste formation, animated by 
what he calls a transmediaphilic relationship between cultural value, digital 
technology, and subjectivity. Finally, Dan Hassler-Forest demonstrates the 
political potential of world building by addressing the relationship between 
heteroglossia and power. A fantastic world like Janelle Monáe’s Afrofuturist 
Wondaland can destabilize absolute distinctions, therefore becoming a 
weapon capable of questioning the present and speculating about the future. 


KEK 


In conclusion, the model of worlds covers phenomena across the boundaries 
of individual media. Some worlds are experimental labyrinths, others result 
from corporate strategies and industrial struggles aimed at saturating the 
market. Some, thanks to the accumulation and intertwining of uses and 
interpretations over time, become sacred monuments or foundational texts 
of a culture. For literature, Franco Moretti writes about the “world-epic’, 
describing heterogeneous structures not reducible to coherent masterpieces 
that reach beyond the sum of their parts, each component interacting with 
the others on both formal and narrative levels (Moretti1996). Monumental 
works like Faust, Der Ring des Nibelungen, Moby Dick, and Ulysses are all 
made of an aggregation of episodes and themes situated by collage and 
juxtaposition, and depend on a process of interpretation over time. In a 
similar way, The Matrix, Harry Potter, Star Trek, Star Wars, Twilight, Game 
of Thrones, or Dr. Who result from industrial transmedia design and become 
vast playgrounds for fan activities that are comparable to complex systems. 
Not only do they include official textual and narrative parts, they also 
contain heterogeneous material produced by fans. 


24 WORLD BUILDING 


Consequently, a world cannot be interpreted as the mere sum of indi- 
vidual media bricks, but instead as a life form, determined by a set of texts 
and their interpretations, superimposed over the years. A multi-layered 
conception of media history is needed: on the one hand, we have to consider 
the history of media as a larger container; on the other hand, we must ex- 
amine it from a microscopical viewpoint, we have to examine the histories 
of individual worlds within their own evolution. Within this framework, 
worlds are artificial objects, made by the researcher who looks for repeti- 
tions and transforms remote individual phenomena into homogeneous 
series. This approach suggests “a reversal of the hierarchy between the 
exception and the series, where the latter becomes—as it were—the true 
protagonist of cultural life” (Moretti 1999, 150). The unique and the excep- 
tion, traditionally found in romanticism and modernism, are not helpful 
here: instead, world building has to be considered as a key to unlock the 
contemporary landscape through promoting a history of serialized content 
and transmedia narratives. 

The essays reunited in these pages contribute, from very different view- 
points, to tackling such a phenomenon of dispersion and reunion of non- 
discrete units, a constant process of repetition and innovation. They also 
commit to shape a growing field of knowledge, the one on world-building 
practices, by underlining the inextricable link between media and worlds. 
Offering in-depth analysis of specific concepts or particular case studies, 
each one of the contributors points out that media are not merely channels 
that convey messages. The growing “world building trend” that has emerged 
in media studies in recent years, and that is explored here from different 
perspectives and approaches, reveals that media truly are complex systems, 
since they are aggregations of technologies, forms, characters, institutions, 
and cultures. Within the current, interconnected panorama, they do not 
only transmit worlds, they become worlds themselves, individually or thanks 
to their networking. Spread over a transnational dimension, they become 
spaces of cultural experimentation and interpreters of communities. 


Works Cited 


Agel, Henri and Souriau, Etienne. 1953. L'Univers filmique. Paris: Flammarion. 

Alexander, L.A. 2013. Fictional Worlds. Traditions in Narrative and the Age of Visual 
Culture. CreateSpace Independent Publishing Platform. 

Barthes, Roland. 1982. L’obvie et lobtus. Paris: Seuil. 

Becker, Howard Saul. 1984. Art Worlds. Oakland: University of California Press. 


INTRODUCTION 25 


Bernardo, Nuno. 2011. The Producer’s Guide to Transmedia: How to Develop, Fund, 
Produce and Distribute Compelling Stories Across Multiple Platforms. Dublin: 
Beactive Books. 

—. 2014. Transmedia 2.0: How to Create an Entertainment Brand Using a Transme- 
dial Approach to Storytelling. Dublin: Beactive Books. 

Besson, Anne. 2015. Constellations: Des mondes fictionnels dans l'imaginaire 
contemporain. Paris: CNRS. 

Boillat, Alain. 2014. Cinéma, machine a mondes: essai sur les films a univers multi- 
ples. Chéne-Bourg: Georg. 

Booth, Paul. 2010. Digital Fandom: New Media Studies. New York: Peter Lang. 

—. 2015. Playing Fans: Negotiating Fandom and Media in the Digital Age. Iowa City: 
University of lowa Press. 

Bordwell, David. 2006. The Way Hollywood Tells It: Story and Style in Modern Movies. 
Oakland: University of California Press. 

—. 2009. “Now Leaving from Platform 1,” In: Observations on Film Art, http://www. 
davidbordwell.net/blog/2009/08/19/now-leaving-from-platform-1/. 

Casetti, Francesco. 2015. The Lumière Galaxy: Seven Key Words for the Cinema to 
Come. New York: Columbia University Press. 

Castronova, Edward. 2005. Synthetic Worlds: The Business and Culture of Online 
Games. Chicago: University of Chicago Press. 

Dena, Christy. 2009. “Transmedia Practice: Theorising the Practice of Expressing a 
Fictional World across Distinct Media and Environments,” Ph.D. Thesis, School 
of Letters, Art and Media Department of Media and Communications Digital 
Cultures Program University of Sydney Australia. 

Eco, Umberto. 1984. The Role of the Reader: Explorations in the Semiotics of Texts. 
Bloomington: Indiana University Press. 

Eco, Umberto. 1986. “Casablanca: Cult Movies and Intertextual Collage,’ In: Travels in 
Hyperreality, 197-211. San Diego, New York, and London: Harcourt Brace Jovanovich. 

Eder, Jens, Fotis Jannidis, and Schneider, Ralph (eds.). 2010. Characters in Fictional 
Worlds Understanding Imaginary Beings in Literature, Film, and Other Media. 
Berlin/New York: De Gruyter. 

Foucault, Michel. 1984 [1967]. “Of Other Spaces: Utopias and Heterotopias,” Archi- 
tecture /Mouvement/ Continuité, October. 

Freeman, Matthew. 2016. Historicising Transmedia Storytelling: Early Twentieth- 
Century Transmedia Story Worlds. New York: Routledge. 

Goodman, Nelson. 1978. Ways of Worldmaking. Indianapolis: Hackett PubCo. 

Gray, Jonathan. 2010. Show Sold Separately: Promos, Spoilers, and Other Media 
Paratexts. New York: New York University Press. 

Havelock, Eric Alfred. 1963. Preface to Plato. History of the Greek Mind. Cambridge: 
Belknap Press, Harvard University Press. 


26 WORLD BUILDING 


Jenkins, Henry. 2006. Convergence Culture: Where Old and New Media Collide. New 
York: New York University Press. 

Jenkins, Henry, Sam Ford, and Green, Joshua. 2013. Spreadable Media: Creating 
Value and Meaning in a Networked Culture. New York and London: New York 
University Press. 

Juul, Jesper. 2005. Half-Real: Video Games between Real Rules and Fictional Worlds. 
Cambridge, Mass: MIT Press. 

Kinder, Marsha. 1991. Playing with Power in Movies, Television, and Video Games: 
From Muppet Babies to Teenage Mutant Ninja Turtles. Berkeley and Los Angeles: 
University of California Press. 

Kinder, Marsha and McPherson, Tara. 2014. Transmedia Frictions. Oakland: 
University of California Press. 

Klastrup, Lisbeth, and Tosca, Susana. 2004. “Transmedial Worlds—Rethinking 
Cyberworld Design.” In: Proceedings of the 2004 International Conference on 
Cyberworlds, edited by Masayuki Nakajima, Yoshinori Hatori, and Alexei Sourin, 
409-416. Los Alamitos, CA: IEEE Computer Society. 

Lavocat, Francoise. 2010. La théorie littéraire des mondes possibles. Paris: CNRS. 

Moretti, Franco. 1996. Modern Epic: The World System from Goethe to Garcia 
Marquez, translated by Quintin Hoare. London and New York: Verso. 

—.1999. Atlas of the European Novel: 1800-1900. London and New York: Verso. 

Morin, Edgar. 2007. “Restricted complexity, general complexity,” In: Worldviews, 
Science and Us: Philosophy and Complexity, edited by C. Gershenson, D. Aerts, 
and B. Edmonds, 5-29. Singapore: World Scientific. 

Murray, Janet Horowitz. 1997. Hamlet on the Holodeck: The Future of Narrative in 
Cyberspace. New York and Toronto: Free Press. 

Pavel, Thomas. 1986. Fictional Worlds. Cambridge, Mass: Harvard University Press. 

Phillips, Andrea. 2012. A Creator’s Guide to Transmedia Storytelling: How to Capti- 
vate and Engage Audiences Across Multiple Platforms. New York: McGraw-Hill 
Education. 

Pratten, Robert. 2011. Getting Started in Transmedia Storytelling 2nd Edition: A Practi- 
cal Guide for Beginners. CreateSpace Independent Publishing Platform, online. 

Proctor, William and McCulloch, Richard (eds.). 2016. “Exploring imaginary worlds: 
Audiences, fan cultures and geographies of the imagination,” themed section 
In: Participations. Journal of Audience and Reception Studies, 3:1, n.p. www. 
participations.org/Volume%2013/Issue%201/S3/2.pdf 

Ravy, Tawnya and Forcier, Eric. 2014. Words, worlds and narratives: transmedia 
and immersion. Oxford: Inter-Disciplinary Press. 

Root-Bernstein, Michelle. 2014. Inventing imaginary worlds: from childhood play 
to adult creativity across the arts and sciences. Lanham, Maryland: Rowman & 
Littlefield Education. 


INTRODUCTION 27 


Rosenfelder, Mark. 2010. The Planet Construction Kit. Chicago: Yonagu Books. 

Ryan, Marie-Laure. 1991. Possible Worlds, Artificial Intelligence and Narrative Theory 
Bloomington: University of Indiana Press. 

—. 2013. “Transmedia Storytelling and Transfictionality,” Poetics Today 34:3, 
361-388. 

Ryan, Marie-Laure and Thon, Jan-Noél. 2014. Storyworlds Across Media: Toward a 
Media-Conscious Narratology. Lincoln: University of Nebraska Press. 

Saint-Gelais, Richard. 2011. Fictions transfuges: la transfictionnalité et ses enjeux. 
Paris: Editions du Seuil. 

Saler, Michael. 2012. As If: Modern Enchantment and The Literary Prehistory of 
Virtual Reality. Oxford: Oxford University Press. 

Scolari, Carlos Alberto. 2009. “Transmedia Storytelling: Implicit Consumers, Nar- 
rative Worlds, and Branding in Contemporary Media Production,” International 
Journal of Communication 3, 586-606. 

Scolari, Carlos Alberto; Bertetti, Paolo, and Freeman, Matthew. 2014. The Trans- 
media Archeology, Storytelling in the borderlines of science fiction, comics and 
pulp magazines. London: Palgrave Pivot. 

Scott, Suzanne 2012. “Who’s Steering the Mothership?: The Role of the Fanboy 
Auteur in Transmedia Storytelling,” In: The Routledge Handbook on Participatory 
Cultures, edited by Aaron Delwiche and Jennifer Henderson, 43-52. New York: 
Routledge. 

Stein, Louisa and Busse, Kristina (eds.). 2012. Sherlock and Transmedia Fandom: Es- 
says on the BBC Series. Jefferson: McFarland. 

Steinberg, Marc. 2012. Anime’s Media Mix: Franchising Toys and Characters in 
Japan. Minneapolis: University Of Minnesota Press. 

Verino, Jessie. 2010. Fundamentals of World Building. Houston: L&L Dreamspell. 

Wolf, MarkJ. P. 2012. Building Imaginary Worlds: The Theory and History of Subcrea- 
tion. New York: Routledge. 


About the author 


Marta Boni is assistant professor of Film and Television Studies at the Uni- 
versity of Montreal. She has published Romanzo Criminale. Transmedia and 
Beyond (Ca’ Foscari University Press, 2013), co-edited Networking Images. 
Approches interdisciplinaires des images en réseau (Presses de la Sorbonne 
Nouvelle, 2013), various essays in international scientific journals such as 
Mise au point, MEI, SERIES, Cinergie, and chapters in edited collections on 
television seriality, fandom, media paratexts, and transmedia. 


Section 1 


Theories of World Building 


1. The Aesthetics of Proliferation’ 


Marie-Laure Ryan 


Boni, Marta (ed.), World Building. Transmedia, Fans, Industries. Amster- 
dam University Press, 2017 


DOI: 10.5117/9789089647566/CHo1 


Abstract 

In this chapter, I will examine the various possible relations between text, 
world, and story. The cases to be discussed include: many texts that build 
one world (i.e. transmedia storytelling); a text that presents a world that 
contains many stories; a text that describes many ontologically distinct 
worlds, each containing its own story; a text that tells a story that involves 
many ontologically different worlds, stacked upon one another; a text that 
tells a story whose ontology comprises different realities, existing side 
by side; and the creation of a storyworld out of another world, through 
the borrowing and manipulation of semiotic material that creates this 
other world. In conclusion, I will ask if “worldness” can be considered a 
scalar concept, realized to different extents in narrative texts, and what 
it takes for a narrative to evoke a world to the imagination. 


Keywords: Narrative proliferation, World vs. Plot, Transmedia, Cognition, 
Ontology 


The theoretical emergence of the concept of world in narratology (sto- 
ryworlds, fictional worlds), in media studies (transmedia worlds), in 
philosophy (possible worlds), and in cosmology (“many-worlds” models) 
has been accompanied, on the creative side, by a practice that I will call “the 
aesthetics of proliferation”. This aesthetic represents a radical break from 
the “textualist” schools that dominated literary theory from New Criticism 
to Deconstruction. With its emphasis on the signifier, at the expense of 
the signified, textualism regards the literary text as the gate to a meaning 
that was absolutely unique to it. It follows that the text was the only mode 
of access to its world; because textualism was reluctant to isolate a narra- 
tive level of meaning—a plot—from the global textual world, it implicitly 
adheres to a strict formula: one text, one world, one story. 


32 WORLD BUILDING 


The narrative turn that took place in the 80s can be regarded asa reaction 
to the radical textualism of New Criticism and Deconstruction. Narratology 
relies on a story/discourse dichotomy that grants equal importance to the 
signified (represented by story) and the signifier (represented by discourse). 
Stories are transmitted by texts, but, since they remain inscribed in our 
mind long after the signifiers have vanished from memory, their nature is 
much more mental than verbal. If stories can be emancipated from words, 
instead of the one text—one world—one story idea, one can now have 
many texts—one world—one story. 

As narratology expanded from literature to other disciplines and media, 
it became more and more reliant on the concept of world. In its current 
narratological use, “world” is no longer the elusive sum of the meanings con- 
veyed by a text, nor the sum of the ideas of an author, but the very concrete 
space projected by stories, literally, a “story world”. Since storyworlds can be 
shared by several stories, the emergence of this concept deals another blow 
to the one text—one world—one story formula. Contemporary culture, 
whether popular or highbrow, implements the full range of possible relations 
between texts, worlds, and stories. This proliferation can take several forms: 


Narrative proliferation: a world with many stories. 

Ontological proliferation: a story with many worlds. 

Textual and medial proliferation: many different texts converging around 
the same world, especially texts of different media. 


Storyworlds 


As a prelude to the discussion of the three types of proliferation, I propose 
to take a closer look at the concept of world. As the Czech narratologist 
Jiri Koten observes, the narratological concept of world can be traced 
back to two lines of ancestry. When we speak of storyworld, the influence 
comes mainly from cognitive approaches to narrative (Herman 2009), 
while, when we speak of fictional world, the influence comes from schools 
and disciplines interested in the ontological status of imaginary entities: 
philosophy of language, formal semantics, and, more particularly, possible 
worlds theory (Pavel, Doležel, Ryan 1991). 

While the concept of world is intuitively very accessible, it is difficult 
to sharpen into a useful narratological tool. The nine definitions in the 
Oxford English Dictionary reveal two dominant themes: world as a planet 
(preferably the planet Earth, but there are also extra-terrestrial worlds), 


THE AESTHETICS OF PROLIFERATION 33 


and world as a totality of things, as “everything that exists”. Since story- 
worlds can encompass interplanetary travel, they are better described by 
the totality than by the planetary definition. A storyworld is not just the 
spatial setting where a story takes place, it is a complex spatio-temporal 
totality that undergoes global changes. Put more simply, a storyworld is an 
imagined totality that evolves according to the events told in the story. To 
follow a story means to simulate mentally the changes that take place in 
the storyworld, using the cues provided by the text. 

The concept of storyworld offers a basis for distinguishing two types 
of narrative elements: intradiegetic elements, which exist within the 
storyworld, and extradiegetic elements, which are not literally part of the 
storyworld, but play a crucial role in its presentation. A good example of the 
opposition between intradiegetic and extradiegetic is a movie soundtrack. 
Film theorists have long been aware of the distinction between diegetic 
music—music that originates inside the storyworld, and is perceived by the 
characters—and extradiegetic music, which controls the expectations and 
emotions of the spectator, but does not exist within the storyworld. (See 
also: Justin Horton’s essay in this book.) In computer games, the storyworld 
is represented by images and dialogues, but the menus that offer the player 
a choice of actions, and the statistics that report the player's level of achieve- 
ment, are extradiegetic. Playing the game involves a constant movement 
in and out of the storyworld. 

While storyworlds transcend the distinction between fiction and nonfic- 
tion (all stories project a storyworld, whether told as true or told as fiction), 
fictional worlds are constituted by their difference from the real world, a 
difference that lies in their mode of existence, or ontological status. The 
main source of inspiration for capturing this ontological status has been the 
philosophical concept of possible worlds. For possible worlds theory (also 
known as modal logic), a world is defined over a set of mutually compatible 
propositions. One way to conceive the mode of existence, or more precisely, 
the coming-into-being of possible worlds is to associate them with future 
states of the real world. Out ofa common matrix of truth values that defines 
the world of the present, different future worlds can be created by changing 
the value of one or more propositions. In accordance with the central tenet 
of possible worlds theory, which claims that there can be only one actual 
or real world from a given point of view, one of these worlds will become 
actual, while the others will remain unrealized possibilities. 

Another explanation for the existence of possible worlds situates their 
origin in an act of the mind, such as imagining, dreaming, hallucinating... 
or producing fictions. If one applies this conception of possible worlds to 


34 WORLD BUILDING 


narrative fiction, fictional worlds will be created by the mind of authors for 
the benefit of audiences. Readers, spectators, or players relocate themselves 
into these worlds through their imagination, pretending that they are actual 
(Ryan 1991). In the best cases, this game of pretense results in an experience 
of immersion in the fictional world. 


Narrative proliferation 


In narrative proliferation, multiple stories are told about the same world, so 
that passing from one story to another does not require ontological relocation. 
While, in most cases of narrative proliferation, the reader can expand the 
image constructed during previous visits to the same world and therefore 
finds herself at home in the storyworld from the very beginning of each new 
story, I will discuss an example that requires significant cognitive initiation: 
the novel Cloud Atlas (Mitchell 2004) and its film adaptation. Both the novel 
and the film consist of six separate stories, which take place at different 
times and in different locations. The first one concerns the journey of an 
American lawyer sailing from the South Pacific back to California in the early 
nineteenth century; the second one is about a young musician who writes 
down scores for a famous composer in the 1920s in Belgium (though the film 
sets the story in England); the third is set in California in the 70s, and tells 
about a young reporter who investigates a scheme by an energy company to 
build a dangerously flawed nuclear power plant to boost the oil industry; the 
fourth follows the misadventures of an elderly, eccentric book publisher who 
is committed against his will to a nursing home in contemporary England; 
the fifth tells about a dystopic future society in Seoul, South Korea, where 
human beings can be cloned, and the clones are used as slaves; and the sixth, 
set in Hawaii in a very distant future, depicts how mankind has regressed to 
a primitive state after a mysterious event called The Fall. 

From an ontological point of view, Cloud Atlas projects a (nearly) unified 
world. The six stories take place in different places, at different times, and 
involve different characters, but they do not represent mutually exclusive pos- 
sibilities. Even though they are not linked to one another by explicit relations 
of causality, we can imagine that the stories correspond to various moments 
in the history of the same global world, strung together like the beads of a 
necklace. The only exception is story 3, which is revealed in story 4 to be a novel 
and not an account of real events;” but, when read for the first time, we take it 
as factual account and, indeed, the kind of events that it reports could very well 
happen in the same world as the other stories. The ontological connection of 


THE AESTHETICS OF PROLIFERATION 35 


the stories is hinted at by the dominant themes of the narrative: the repeated 
claim that “everything is connected” and the presence of an identical birth 
mark on the shoulder of the main character of each story, which suggests 
that these characters are reincarnations of the same individual, despite their 
widely different personalities. In the movie, the theme of reincarnation is 
reinforced by the fact that the same actors play different roles in different 
stories, a device that would not be possible in a novel. 

An even stronger sign of ontological connection is a system of embedding 
that locates the text of each story as a material object within the next story. 
For instance, the text of the first story is the diary of a character named 
Adam Ewing. The hero of the second story, Robert Frobisher, discovers and 
reads this manuscript. Frobisher composes a musical work titled “Cloud 
Atlas” and writes a series of letters to his lover. Both of these media objects 
fall into the hands of Luisa Rey, the reporter of the third story. And so on 
until the last story? 

While from an ontological perspective all the stories of Cloud Atlas belong 
to the same world, from a cognitive perspective, each story projects its own 
storyworld. When the readers or spectators pass from one story to the next, 
they experience a world where nothing is familiar: neither the setting, nor 
the characters, nor the social environment, and readers must construct 
the storyworld from an almost blank state (I say almost blank, because we 
always import some information from our experience of the real world). 
The organization of the text on the discourse level does little to alleviate the 
cognitive burden of constructing six different story worlds. In the novel, the 
stories are divided into two parts (except for the sixth story), and these parts 
are presented in the sequence 1-2-3-4-5-6-5-4-3-2-1. This pattern actualizes 
a structure known in computer science as a stack: the various elements are 
piled on one another, and they are processed according to the principle “first 
in, last out”. The stack principle means that, when readers reach level six, 
they must keep five half-told stories in the back of their mind. Only story six 
unfolds as an uninterrupted whole. Once story six is completed, it is popped 
from the stack and the text returns to story five, which is still reasonably 
fresh in memory. As the text returns to older levels, it becomes more and 
more difficult for the reader to remember what the story was all about. 

It is fortunate that the medium of the book allows readers to return to 
earlier pages. The spectators of the movie do not have that luxury. In the 
film, the symmetrical stack structure is replaced with a chaotic organiza- 
tion. The stories are fragmented into many more elements than in the novel, 
and these fragments, which tend to become shorter and shorter as the film 
progresses, are presented in a seemingly random order. For spectators who 


36 WORLD BUILDING 


see the film without having read the novel—and this was my case—,, it is 
very difficult to reconstitute the plot. When I left the theatre, I was totally 
confused, and the first thing I did when I got home was to look up the 
Wikipedia article to make sense of the film. 


Ontological proliferation 


While the various storyworlds of Cloud Atlas differ cognitively, but are logi- 
cally compossible and could, therefore, be part of the same global world, 
we find the reverse situation in Tom Tykwer’s earlier film, Run, Lola, Run. 
The film represents a genre that David Bordwell (2002) calls “forking path” 
narratives. These narratives focus on a decision point, out of which several 
different futures develop depending on the character’s deliberate choice of 
action, or on random coincidence. In Run Lola Run, the decision point is a 
phone call to Lola from her boyfriend, Manni, who has lost a large sum of 
money he owes to a crime boss. He will face dire consequences ifthe money 
is not delivered within 20 minutes. The film explores three forking paths 
in which Lola tries different courses of action to get the money in time. In 
the first “run”, Lola tries to borrow the money from her father, a banker, but 
he refuses; then she helps Manni rob a supermarket, but she gets shot and 
apparently dies. In the second run, she robs her father’s bank, but Manni is 
hit by a car as he runs toward her to get the money. In the third run, Lola 
wins the money at the casino, but, in the meantime, Manni has recovered the 
money he lost, so everything is for the best in the best of all possible worlds. 

The three worlds that fork out of the common decision point are clearly 
different from an ontological point of view, since they contain logically 
incompatible events, but, in all three branches, Manni has the same prob- 
lem, Lola has the same goal, the setting is constant, and the network of 
interpersonal relations remains unchanged. As the clock is rewound and 
a different alternative is explored, the spectator is taken back to a familiar 
situation and no additional cognitive effort needs to be devoted to the 
construction of the background. 


Comparing narrative and ontological proliferation 
Cloud Atlas and Run, Lola, Run illustrate two basic forms of proliferation: a 


world that includes many stories for Cloud Atlas, and a story (or text) that 
includes many worlds for Run, Lola, Run. The case of a world with many 


THE AESTHETICS OF PROLIFERATION 37 


stories is found in many different genres and media: for instance, in TV 
soap operas, which represent the interleaved destinies of many characters 
and follow multiple plot lines; in novels of magical realism, which often 
consist of many little stories taking place in the same setting, rather than of 
a unified narrative arc; or ina film like Babel, which presents three different 
stories, one located in Mexico, another in Morocco, and the third in Japan. 
The spectator knows that these stories take place in the same world because 
they present common elements. 

Another example ofa world with more than one story comes from a struc- 
ture that may be called non-ontological narrative embedding; in other words, 
the embedding of a story that refers to the same world as the framing story 
and extends its representation, rather than transporting the reader into a new 
world. For instance, in “Sarrasine”, the short story by Balzac that was made 
famous by Roland Barthes’ S/Z, the narrative begins with the description of 
a lavish reception in the Parisian house of a rich family. Among the guests is 
a withered old man who awakens the curiosity of a marquise. The narrator 
tells the story of the old man to the marquise in exchange for a night of love 
that he does not get in the end, because the marquise is too upset by the tale 
to keep her promise. Since the embedded and embedding stories refer to the 
same world, they complement each other and passing from one to the other 
does not require the crossing of an ontological boundary. 

In contrast to “Sarrasine”, works such as The Canterbury Tales, The 
Decameron, or The Arabian Nights are not worlds with many stories, but 
rather texts with many worlds. These texts feature a framing story and many 
embedded ones, told by the characters of the framing story. Insofar as the 
embedded stories are presented as fictions, they do not refer to the same 
world as the framing story. For instance, the characters in “Ali Baba and the 
Forty Thieves” or “Aladdin and the Magic Lamp” are not part of the world 
in which Scheherazade tells stories to the Sultan to postpone her execution 
and there is no chance that Scheherazade could meet Aladdin, except in 
a postmodern parody. These examples illustrate the case of ontological 
proliferation: a text that sends its readers into many other worlds than the 
primary fictional world, where the embedding story takes place (see: Ryan 
1991, chapter g on the two types of embedding). 


Textual and medial proliferation 


The third type of proliferation—many texts, one world, and, depending on 
the case, one or many stories—has been with us for a long time in the form 


38 WORLD BUILDING 


of adaptation, in which, roughly, the same story is told by texts of different 
media, and, in the form of what Richard Saint-Gelais (2011) calls transfictional- 
ity, in which storyworlds are expanded through new stories usually told in 
the same medium as the original, such as prequels, sequels, midquels, or the 
story of secondary characters.‘ In both adaptation and transfictionality, the 
authors are generally different. More recently, a cultural phenomenon known 
as transmedia storytelling (Jenkins 2006) has combined these two forms, so 
that we now have “franchises” such as Star Wars, Harry Potter, or Lord of the 
Rings that include both adaptations and transfictional expansions using any 
of the media capable of narration, as well as some non-media objects such as 
T-shirts, Lego sets, and costumes that can be used by fans as “props in games 
of make-believe” (Walton 1990). The entertainment industry tries to persuade 
us that, thanks to transmedia, storytelling will never be the same again. Does 
this mean that transmedia storytelling develops a new narrative aesthetic? 
Oris it just a marketing ploy? If we regard aesthetic experience as a response 
to an intentional design,’ transmedia aesthetics would require a deliberate 
distribution of narrative content across different media. This is how Henry 
Jenkins conceives the phenomenon: 


Transmedia storytelling represents a process where integral elements 
of a fiction get dispersed systematically across multiple delivery chan- 
nels for the purpose of creating a unified and coordinated entertainment 
experience. Ideally each medium makes its own unique contribution to 
the unfolding of the story. (Italics original) (Jenkins 2007) 


For this ideal to be realized, transmedia storytelling should be planned top- 
down and the user should become familiar, if not with all the documents of 
the system, at least with a significant number of them, so as to be able to fill 
in the gaps and to fit them together into a larger picture. The vast majority 
of transmedia franchises do not, however, develop top-down, but, rather, 
exploit the success of a single-medium narrative that has already achieved 
popularity, by offering the public more and more stories that take place in 
the same storyworld. This is how the franchises of Lord of the Rings, Harry 
Potter, A Song of Ice and Fire, and, to a lesser extent, Star Wars came into 
being.° Rare are the transmedia projects that are conceived, from the very 
beginning, as acts of storytelling that involve many media. One of them is 
Alpha o.7,a German project that augments a short TV series with a number 
of visual and textual documents available online (Ryan 2013); another is 
The Matrix (Jenkins 2006), which was planned by the Wachowski (then) 
brothers as a network that encompassed, in addition to the three films, 


THE AESTHETICS OF PROLIFERATION 39 


comics, computer games and short animé films. In both of these cases, the 
transmedia documents are optional peripherals that flesh out the world 
of a main document, known in the entertainment industry as “Mother 
Ship”, and many users will limit their exploration of the storyworld to the 
landscapes that can be seen from this ship. Those who are truly in love 
with the storyworld will, however, follow links to the peripheral elements 
to deepen their immersion. The transmedia buildup of Alpha 0.7 and The 
Matrix does not seem, however, to have significantly contributed to their 
success: Alpha 0.7 was a popular failure; as for The Matrix, the vast majority 
of its fans was not aware of the existence of the transmedia peripherals, 
except, perhaps, for the computer games. 

Transmedia franchises may be sprouting like mushrooms (every best- 
seller seems to generate its own), but the art of orchestrating documents 
representing various media for a unified narrative experience remains to 
be mastered. Facebook commentator Brian Clark (2012) may be right when 


m 


he claims that “there’s never been a big ‘transmedia hit” (meaning projects 
conceived as transmedia from the very beginning). Yet, most developers 
and scholars of transmedia agree on one point: for a narrative idea to lend 
itself to transmedia treatment, its appeal should not lie in a linear story, 
because the temporal arc of stories has nothing to gain from fragmentation 
and dispersion across media (the fans of a story tend to want to stick to the 
same medium); rather, the narrative idea should reside in its world, because 
worlds can contain many stories, and they can be described by encyclopedic 


collections of documents addressing many senses. 


Worlds vs. stories as sources of interest 


Narrative aesthetics is traditionally conceived of as the art of creating stories 
that engage the reader’s interest through effects such as suspense, curiosity, 
surprise (Sternberg 1992), or through a dramatic contour of rise and fall in 
tension. All these features are temporal in nature. Yet spatial worldmaking, 
too long looked down upon as the trademark of lowbrow “genre fiction’, 
is increasingly being recognized as a legitimate form of art (DiGiovanna 
2007; Wolf 2012). 

Figure 1represents a continuum from story-dominant to world-dominant 
texts. While the texts on the left emphasize story, or plot, they are not 
completely deprived of world, because the core constituents of stories are 
events and their participants. Since participants are existents, and since 
existents are objects with spatial extension, they must exist somewhere. 


40 WORLD BUILDING 


Story- World- 
dominant dominant 
texts texts 

"The king Jokes Fantasy 

died, then Tragedy Science fiction Micronations: 
the queen Talossa, 

died of Bergonia, 
grief” —EM. Lizbekistan, 
Forster etc. 


1.1: Story-dominant vs. world-dominant genres 


This means that there must be a world that contains them, but this world 
may be left largely implicit. Consider E.M. Forster’s example of a plot: “The 
king died, then the queen died of grief.” If this is a story, it offers little 
to the imagination. Readers will register the information that something 
happened in some abstract fictional world, but they will not be tempted to 
visualize the scene and to fill in the blanks in the story. 

A narrative genre that minimizes world-creation is jokes. Not only are 
jokes too short to display a rich storyworld, the same joke can be told 
about different kinds of people: for instance, jokes that used to be told of 
certain ethnic groups are now told about blondes (assumed to be stupid), 
and jokes about lawyers are recycled by musicians into conductor jokes. 
The fact that the butt of certain jokes can be easily transformed from 
one category of people to another demonstrates that the appeal of these 
jokes lies in some properties of the story that transcends the particular 
embodiment of the characters. Another narrative genre that privileges plot 
over world is tragedy: the genre downplays particular social circumstances 
to focus on a network of personal relations that could happen anywhere, 
anytime. This is why Greek tragedy is best performed on a bare stage with 
no distracting props. 

The case of world without story is much more feasible than the case 
of stories without worlds. A good example is the phenomenon of the 
micro-nation. The Internet contains many imaginary countries created 
for the pure pleasure of playing God. They have names like Bergonia and 
Talossa,’ and they are brought into being by documents that represent 


THE AESTHETICS OF PROLIFERATION 41 


an encyclopedic sum of knowledge. The creators of these micro-nations 
can play as many roles as they want: ethnographer, geographer, political 
scientist, linguist, cartographer, historian, and climatologist. But one 
role they do not play is that of novelist. Visiting these countries is there- 
fore like reading all the descriptions in a novel and skipping the action 
parts. 

While jokes and tragedy come the closest to the story pole, science fiction 
and fantasy are the closest genres to the world pole. In these genres, the plot 
serves as a trail that takes the audience through the storyworld and provides 
a glimpse into its distinctive natural features and cultural institutions. The 
greater the distance of a fictional world from ordinary reality, the more 
the interest of the reader or spectator will be directed toward the world, at 
the expense of the plot, because the invention of a world that differs from 
reality is a true feat of the imagination. J.R.R. Tolkien regarded it an act 
of subcreation that emulates, and therefore pays homage to the creative 
power of God (Wolf 2012). 

The one-dimensional schema of figure 1 is misleading, because it sug- 
gests that the more prominent the world, the less interesting the plot, and 
vice versa, the more indeterminate the world, the more interesting the 
plot. This is certainly not the case, as we can see from the example of “The 
king died, then the queen died of grief.” Here, there is hardly any world, but 
this lack of worldness does not add to the appeal of the plot. The story is 


+ Fantasy, 
Science fiction War and Peace 


Micronations 
Interest 


In world 
Tragedy 


“= Jokes 
The king died, etc. 


— - 


Interest in plot 


1.2: A two-dimensional version of figure 1 


42 WORLD BUILDING 


very boring. On the other hand, there are great works of literature—here 
I think especially of the great novels of the nineteenth century—in which 
plot and world are both very developed and none takes second seat to the 
other. To represent this situation, we need a two-dimensional diagram, 
such as figure 2, in which the y axis represents “worldness” and the x 
axis represents “plotness’ or “tellability”. The values attributed to various 
works should not be taken as absolute: they represent my own subjective 
experience. In addition, the contrast between story-dominant and world- 
dominant narratives can be represented as the set of tendencies shown 


in illustration 1.3. 


Plot-dominant narratives 


World-dominant narratives 


Textual realization 
Medial realization 
Creative process 
Relation to actual world 
Representation of world 
Informational texture 
Role of world 

Typical user experience 
Focus 

Spatio-temporal dominant 
Preferred paratextual 


One text 

Single medium 
Individual 

Close (realistic) 
Incomplete representation 
Thin 

Container for plot 
First steps in world 
What? Who? 

Time 

Plot summary 


Many texts 

Multiple media 
Collaborative 

Distant (fantastic) 
Strives toward completeness 
Dense 

Focus of attention 
Return to familiar world 
Where? 

Space and place 
Encyclopedia 


representation 


1.3: Contrasting tendencies of story-dominant and world-dominant narratives. (World column 
inspired by DiGiovanna 2007) 


Conclusion 


The aesthetics of proliferation may seem, at first sight, to be a truly con- 
temporary phenomenon, a practice inspired in part by the media explosion 
of the late 20™ century, and in part by the typically postmodern concern 
for the diversity of perspectives from which reality can be described. At 
second sight, however, the aesthetics of proliferation has been with us for 
avery long time. Do you want multiple stories within a world? Look at the 
Renaissance epic Orlando Furioso, a text that the author, Ariosto, expanded 
with new episodes and new subplots throughout his lifetime. Do you want 
multiple worlds within a story? Look at the complex system of embedding 
of the Arabian Nights, or of Baroque novels. Transmedia storytelling? Think 


THE AESTHETICS OF PROLIFERATION 43 


of how the Bible, or Greek myths, have inspired painters, playwrights, 
poets, and composers for countless generations. In retrospect, it is the sup- 
posedly traditional aesthetics of textual autonomy and exclusivity—one 
text, one world, one story—that seems to be the exception rather than the 
rule. It is tied to modernism and to mid-20" century conceptions of the 
nature of literary language. 

Yet, there is something distinctively contemporary about Cloud Atlas, 
Run Lola Run, and recent projects in transmedia storytelling such as The 
Matrix or Alpha o.7. In older times, proliferation was spontaneous, bottom- 
up, multi-authored. Stories sprouted branches in many directions, like a 
rhizome, and storyworlds grew organically. Popular stories inspired trans- 
media adaptations without having been conceived for this explicit purpose. 
This remains the case today with the transmedia franchises that exploit the 
success of a monomedial work, such as the Harry Potter or Lord of the Rings 
novels, or with most novel-to-film adaptations; but, in addition to content 
that spreads itself spontaneously,’ we see more and more forms of prolifera- 
tion that are programmatic, top-down, and pre-planned by development 
teams. There is something contrived and deliberately experimental about 
the proliferation of subworlds and stories in Cloud Atlas: they do not arise 
out of each other nor out of any kind of internal narrative necessity. It is as 
if the author had decided, “I'll write a novel with a combination of worlds 
and stories that has never been done before.” As for transmedia storytelling, 
it has become a scheme to make people consume more and more media 
objects and demonstrate their loyalty to the brand. Storytelling becomes a 
game of how many media can be involved in a project, just as Cloud Atlas 
is a game of how many different worlds and stories can be crammed into a 
novel and how they can be interlinked. 

The proliferation of texts around worlds, of worlds within texts, and 
of stories within worlds may be as old as narrative itself, but it is only in 
contemporary culture that it has been systematically explored, and elevated 
into an aesthetic. 


Notes 


1. Some ideas developed in these texts are also found in Ryan, Marie-Laure. 
2015. “Texts, Worlds, Stories: Narrative Worlds as Cognitive and Ontologi- 
cal Concept,” In: Narrative Theory, Literature, and New Media: Narrative 
Minds and Virtual Worlds, edited by Mari Hatavera, Matti Hyvarinen, Maria 
Mäkelä, and Frans Mäyrä, 13-28. London: Routledge. 


44 WORLD BUILDING 


2. By contrast, all the other stories mimic non-fictional genres: story 1is a 
diary, story 2 a series of letters, story 4 a written autobiography, story 5 
responses to an interviewer, and story 6 an oral narrative of personal experi- 
ence told by the protagonist to his grandson. Stories 1, 2, 4, 5, and 6 belong 
to a first-degree ontological level, while story 3, as a fiction within a fiction, 
belongs to a second-degree level. 

3.  Ifstory 3 is a novel, the fact that its heroine, Luisa Rey, can get hold of the 
letters and musical compositions of Robert Frobisher is a metalepsis, that 
is, a transgression of ontological boundaries, since fictional characters have 
no access to the real world. On the other hand, real-world members can 
read about fictional characters, so it is not a paradox that the fictionally 
nonfictional protagonist of story 4, Timothy Cavendish, can read the Luisa 
Rey novels. 

4.  Transfictionality also includes two other operations: one that changes the 
storyworld (modification) and one that transposes the story into a differ- 
ent world (transposition). Cf. Doležel, though he does not use the term of 
transfictionality. I do not discuss these operations here since I restrict my 
focus to the case of one world, many texts. 

5. This formula holds for human-created works of art, but I don’t want to 
exclude the possibility of an aesthetic appreciation of a randomly produced 
pattern, such as the shape of a rock. 

6. I write “to a lesser extent Star Wars” because the franchise was conceived 
from the very beginning as spanning several films. 

7- Bergonia resides at http://www.bergonia.org/; Talossa at www.talossa.com. 
See: “The Aerican Empire”, New York Times, http://www.aericanempire.com/ 
nytimes.html. 

8. Cf. Henry Jenkins’s concept of “spreadable media’, which really means “me- 
dia that facilitate the spreading of content”. See: Jenkins et al., 2013. 


Works cited 


Barthes, Roland. 1970. S/Z. Paris: Seuil. 

Bordwell, David. 2002. “Film Futures,” SubStance 31:1. 88-104. 

Clark, Brian. 2012. “Transmedia is a Lie.” https://www.facebook.com/notes/ 
brian-clark/transmedia-is-a-lie/10150841850433993. 

DiGiovanna, James. 2007. “Worldmaking as Art Form,” The Journal of the Arts in 
Society, 2:1. 115-22. 

Doležel, Lubomir. 1998. Heterocosmica: Fiction and Possible Worlds. Baltimore, MD: 
Johns Hopkins University Press. 

Forster, Edward Morgan. 1990. [1927]. Aspects of the Novel. Hammondsworth: 
Penguin. 


THE AESTHETICS OF PROLIFERATION 45 


Herman, David. 2009. Basic Elements of Narrative. Malden, MA: Wiley-Blackwell. 

Jenkins, Henry. 2006. Convergence Culture: Where Old and New Media Collide. New 
York: New York University Press. 

—. “Transmedia Storytelling 101.” Confessions of an Aca-Fan. (Blog.) 

http://henryjenkins.org/2007/03/transmedia_storytelling_101.html 

Jenkins, Henry; Ford, Sam, and Green, Joshua. 2013. Spreadable Media: Creating 
Value and Meaning in a Networked Culture. New York: New York University Press. 

Koten, Jiri. 2010. “Fictional Worlds and Story worlds: Forms and Means of Classifica- 
tion,” In: Four Studies of Narrative, edited by Bohumil Fort, Alice Jedličková, Jiri 
Koten, and Ondrej Sladek, 58-67. Prague: Institute of Czech Literature. 

Mitchell, David. 2012 [2004]. Cloud Atlas. New York: Random House. 

Pavel, Thomas. 1986. Fictional Worlds. Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press. 

Ryan, Marie-Laure. 1991. Possible Worlds, Artificial Intelligence and Narrative 
Theory. Bloomington: University of Indiana Press. 

—. 2013. “Transmedial Storytelling and Transfictionality,” Poetics Today 34.3: 
362-88. 

Saint-Gelais, Richard. 2011. Fictions transfuges: La transfictionnalité et ses enjeux. 
Paris: Seuil. 

Sternberg, Meir. 1992. “Telling in Time (II): Chronology, Teleology, Narrativity,” 
Poetics Today 13:3. 463-541. 

Walton, Kendall. 1990. Mimesis as Make-Believe: On the Foundations of the Repre- 
sentational Arts. Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press. 

Wolf, MarkJ.P. 2012. Building Imaginary Worlds: The Theory and History of Subcrea- 
tion. London: Routledge. 


Media cited 


Alpha o.7: der Feind in dir. Directed by Marc Rensing. 2010. Köln, Germany: Zeit- 
sprung Entertainment GmbH. Siidwest Rundfunk. TV Mini-Series. 

Babel. Directed by Alejandro Gonzalez Iñárritu. 2006. Burbank, CA: Paramount, 
2007, DVD. 

Cloud Atlas. Directed by Andy and Lana Wachowski and Tom Tykwer. 2012. 
Burbank, CA: Warner Home Video, 2012, Blu-ray. 

Run Lola Run (Lola rennt). Directed by Tom Tykwer, 1998. Culver City: Sony Pictures, 
2008, Blu-ray. 

The Matrix, The Matrix Reloaded, The Matrix Revolutions. Directed by Andy and 
Larry Wachowski. 1999, 2003, 2003. Burbank, CA: Warner Home Video, 2014, 
Blu-ray. 


46 WORLD BUILDING 
About the author 


Marie-Laure Ryan is an independent scholar based in Colorado. She 
is the author of Possible Worlds, Artificial Intelligence and Narrative 
Theory (1991), Narrative as Virtual Reality: Immersion and Interactivity 
in Literature and Electronic Media (2001; second edition 2015), Avatars of 
Story (2006), and Narrating Space / Spatializing Narrative, with Kenneth 
Foote and Maoz Azaryahu (2016). She has also edited numerous collections, 
including the Routledge Encyclopedia of Narrative (2005) with David Her- 
man and Manfred Jahn and The Johns Hopkins Guidebook to Digital Media, 
co-edited with Lori Emerson and Benjamin Robertson. Her scholarly work 
has earned her the Prize for Independent Scholars and the Jeanne and 
Aldo Scaglione Prize for Comparative Literature, both from the Modern 
Language Association, and she has been the recipient of Guggenheim and 
NEA fellowships. She has also been Scholar in Residence at the University 
of Colorado, Boulder and Johannes Gutenberg Fellow at the University of 
Mainz, Germany. Her website is at marilaur.info and she can be reached 
at marilaur@gmail.com. 


2. Building Science-Fiction Worlds 


Paolo Bertetti 


Boni, Marta (ed.), World Building. Transmedia, Fans, Industries. Amster- 
dam University Press, 2017 


DOI: 10.5117/9789089647566/CHo2 


Abstract 

Fantasy and science fiction are crucial genres for techniques of transme- 
dia storytelling, with notable contemporary examples such as The Matrix, 
Star Wars, Lost, Heroes, etc. What do these genres offer as a structural or 
thematic framework for constructing storyworlds that cross multiple 
media? The nature of world-creating in science fiction and fantasy is 
pivotal, as the creation of detailed worlds that serve as a bedrock for inner 
(fictional) references is a structural necessity. The paper investigates, 
from a semiotic point of view, the nature and the modes of composition 
of science-fiction worlds as “structurally different from the real one” (Eco 
1984, 1257), showing the mechanisms of world building, together with the 


modes of representation and transmission of information. 


Keywords: Science Fiction, Possible worlds, World-building, Fantasy 


Fantasy and science fiction seem to be crucial genres for transmedia sto- 
rytelling, with notable contemporary examples such as The Matrix, Star 
Wars, Doctor Who, Lost, and Heroes. What do fantasy and science fiction 
offer as a structural or thematic framework for constructing storyworlds 
that cross multiple media? If world building is a key concern of transmedia 
storytelling (Jenkins 2006), the nature of world creating in these genres is 
pivotal, and certainly much more evident than in crime, mystery stories, 
and even horror stories; in science fiction and fantasy, in fact, the creation 
of detailed settings seems to be a structural necessity. 

My contribution focuses on science fiction writing from a semiotic and 
narratological point of view, with particular reference to studies on possible 
narrative worlds and on enunciation. First, I will briefly summarize some 
key aspects of the theory of possible worlds with regard to the science fiction 
genre; on this basis, I will tackle a definition of science fiction worlds before 


48 WORLD BUILDING 


investigating more deeply their nature. Finally, I will explore the question of 
narrative transmission, both in regard to the first elements that allow access 
to the fictional world and, more generally, in relation to the enunciative 
modalities of the genre. 


Possible worlds 


The notion of Possible Worlds has been elaborated in modal logic by 
philosophers of the analytic school (Kripke, Lewis, Rescher, Hintikka), 
taking inspiration from the philosophy of Leibniz and, probably, also 
from science-fiction writers’ conception of parallel universes (see: Volli 
1978). In modal logic, possible worlds are formal constructs, bare undif- 
ferentiated sets that have no structure whatsoever, while, in semiotic 
and narratological studies, possible worlds have substantive nature, they 
are “overfurnished sets” (Eco 1978, 27), of which one must know acting 
individuals and properties that make them different from the real world. 
Following Umberto Eco: 


(i) A possible world is a possible state of affairs expressed by a set of 
relevant propositions where for every proposition either p o non-p; (ii) 
as such it outlines a set of possible individuals along with their properties; 
(iii) since some of these properties or predicates are actions, a possible 
world is also a possible course of events; (iv) since this course of events is 
not actual, it must depend on the propositional attitudes of somebody; 
in other terms possible worlds are worlds imagined, believed, wished, 
etcetera. (Eco 1978, 29) 


As products of such mental activity, possible worlds are cultural constructs 
in Eco’s conception: they have a semiotic and textual nature. They have no 
ontological existence, unlike the parallel universes described by science- 
fiction writers, which lie on different planes of reality, but are not less 
“real” than ours. A possible world is a set of individuals (i.e. recognizable 
entities: characters as well as places and objects, etc.) singled out as bundles 
of properties (i.e. physical qualities, relations, actions performed, etc.). 
Thus, we can assume the notion of property as primitive: we can construct 
different possible worlds by combining a set of properties differently or 
simply by changing a single property. 

In particular, we can create a possible world starting from our “real” 
world (the so-called Actual World, in opposition to Possible Worlds) by 


BUILDING SCIENCE-FICTION WORLDS 49 


altering (i.e. activation or narcotization) even a single property. For ex- 
ample, the possible science-fiction world outlined in Dying Inside (1972), 
a novel by Robert Silverberg, is different from ours because it is inhabited 
by an individual called David Selig who has the ability to read people’s 
minds; a property, as we know, that is not present in the Actual World. 
Apart from this, the blanket of information described in the novel can 
almost completely overlap with the Actual World. However, the text of 
the novel presents to the reader only a limited number of the propositions 
and the properties that are predicable of the individual “David Selig”, 
mainly those that are relevant to identify the possible world, while many 
others that are common to the world of reference (for example, the fact 
that he has two feet, eats, and speaks English) are taken for granted and 
not mentioned. 

Generally speaking, any possible world overlaps the Actual World to 
a large degree, while differing from it in some respects. There are obvi- 
ous reasons of expressive economy for this, but there are also deeper 
motivations related to the nature of fictional worlds. In fact, fictional 
worlds are, by their very nature, largely incomplete: “No fictional world 
could be totally autonomous since it would be impossible for it to outline 
a maximal and consistent state of affairs by stipulating ex nihilo the 
whole of its individuals and of their property” (Eco 1978, 31).’ According 
to Doležel (1989), fictional worlds are inevitably incomplete “small worlds’, 
as incompleteness is a distinctive feature of fictional existence. Every 
text, in fact, only partially describes its world, from a certain perspective: 
detail is determined by its usefulness in serving textual strategies. Other 
scholars underline the “role of the reader” (Eco 1979), who “fills the gaps” 
of the text, making inferences based on his or her encyclopedic knowledge. 
In doing so, “readers imagine fictional worlds as the closest possible to 
Actual World, and they only make changes that are mandated by the 
text” (Ryan 2013). 

For instance, the beginning of the “Editor’s Preface” in Clifford Simak’s 
classic novel City (1952) mentions Dogs: 


These are the stories that the Dogs tell when the fires burn high and the 
wind is from the north. Then each family circle gathers at the hearthstone 
and the pups sit silently and listen and when the story’s done they ask 
many questions: 

“What is Man?” they'll ask. 

Or perhaps: “What is a city?” 

Or: “What is a war?” 


50 WORLD BUILDING 


In this case, the readers will imagine creatures that look like real-world 
dogs in every respect (and have all their properties) except for the fact that 
these creatures sit around hearthstones. Ryan (1991) calls this interpretive 
rule “the principle of minimal departure”; Walton describes it as “the reality 
principle”. 


Towards a definition of science-fiction worlds 


According to possible worlds theorists (Eco 1979; Pavel 1986; Doležel 1998) 
every fictional text outlines a possible world; this is true not only for sci- 
ence fiction or fantasy narratives, which describe imaginary worlds, but it 
generally applies to any work of fiction. Eco says that “any work of narrative, 
even the most realistic, depicts a possible world inasmuch as it presents a 
population of individuals and a succession of states of the world that do 
not correspond to those of our everyday experience” (Eco 1984, 1257). From 
this point of view, there is no fundamental difference between the small 
fishing village of Aci Trezza depicted in the Italian veristic masterpiece 
I Malavoglia by Giovanni Verga, the Riverworld created by P.J. Farmer, 
or Tolkien’s middle-earth. However, it is obvious that, in some respects, 
these three worlds are essentially different. What is it that differentiates 
between the world ofa “realistic” narrative and those described in a science- 
fiction or fantasy novel? Reworking Robert Scholes’ definition of fantastic 
literature as “Structural Fabulation’, Eco says that this kind of narrative 
builds “structurally possible worlds”: 


What distinguishes the fantastic narratives from the realistic [...] is the 
fact that its possible world is structurally different from the real one. I use 
the term “structural” in a very wide sense. To refer to the cosmological 
structure as much as to social. (Eco 1984, 1257) 


For Eco, science fiction is a particular kind of fantastic literature: 


SF exists as an autonomous genre when a counterfactual speculation 
about a structurally possible world is conducted by extrapolation from 
certain tendencies in today’s world, which is the very possibility of a 
“futurizable” world. That is, SF always takes the form of an anticipation 
and anticipation always takes the form of a conjecture formulated from 
existing tendencies. (Eco 1984, 1257) 


BUILDING SCIENCE-FICTION WORLDS 51 


Eco therefore restricts science fiction to the sole narratives of anticipa- 
tion—in other words, to that kind of science fiction sometimes called 
“speculative fiction’—that focus on the mechanism of extrapolation, in 
which such extrapolation can, from time to time, be social, technological, 
scientific, etc. He defines this kind of fantastic literature in which “a possible 
world represents a future phase of the world as we have it here and now” 
(Eco 1984, 1257) as metachronia or metatopia and distinguishes it from the 
allotopia (where the world is really different from the Actual World, as is 
the case with fantasy worlds where wizards and fairies exist), the utopias 
(where the possible world exists somewhere, parallel with our own but 
normally inaccessible to us; “usually—Eco goes on to say—it constitutes a 
model of the way our real world ought to be”) and the uchronias (where the 
parallel world is based on a “what if” clause; for example, what would have 
happened if the Axis forces had won the war, as in Philip K. Dick’s The Man 
in the High Castle [1962]?). 

Eco’s typology is certainly ingenious and theoretically well-founded, 
but his definition of science fiction is rather narrow and abstract, while 
also failing to account for the variety of the phenomenon, so Eco himself 
is forced to admit that we can have science fiction works also among 
the utopias, the uchronias, or the allotopias (as in the case of space ope- 
ras)”. Moreover, from a more general point of view, in a logic of possible 
worlds—as Eco understands it—, it is not sufficient to talk of “structurally 
possible worlds”, instead, we must specify the particular properties that 
distinguish a science fiction world from a naturalist or a fantasy one, as 
well as the rules of construction. In short, we should identify and define a 
class of property, whose presence or absence in the text defines the world 
as science-fictional, or fantastic, or realistic. Doležel (1998) does not deal 
explicitly with science fiction and focuses very little on fantastic literature, 
but he does nevertheless make some useful distinctions. He poses a distinc- 
tion at the level of alethic modalities between logically possible worlds 
and physically (or naturally) possible worlds. In physically possible worlds, 
there is nothing—nor does anything happen—that violates the alethic 
conditions of the Actual World (Doležel 1998, 121). On the contrary, fictional 
worlds that violate the laws of the Actual World are supernatural worlds 
and physically impossible. Science-fiction worlds (and the individuals 
that inhabit them, such as extra-terrestrials) belong to naturally possible 
worlds, as they are physically possible. Doležel believes that using modal 
criteria of distinction enables us to avoid ontological commitment as well 
as the problems related to subjective beliefs and the changes in scientific 
knowledge. 


52 WORLD BUILDING 


Similar criteria are adopted by Marie-Laure Ryan (1991; 2005), who 
sketches a complex typology of possible worlds related to fictional genres 
based on the various relations between Actual World and Fictional Worlds 
(the so-called “accessibility relations”): 


Ina broad sense, possibility depends not only on logical principles but also 
on physical laws and material causality. Following this interpretation, 
narrative worlds can be classified as realistic [...] or fantastic, depending 
on whether or not the events they relate could physically occur in the 
real world. (Ryan 2005, 449) 


For Ryan (1991), there are different degrees of accessibility between Actual 
World (AW) and Fictional Worlds (properly TAW “Textual Actual Worlds”, as 
defined by Ryan) depending on the different genres. In decreasing order of 
stringency, the types of accessibility include: identities of properties (when 
the two worlds are furnished by the same objects and they have the same 
properties), identity of inventory (when the two worlds are furnished by 
the same objects and they do not have the same properties), compatibility 
of inventory (when the fictional world has the same inventory of AW, as 
well as some native members), as well as chronological, taxonomic, logical, 
and linguistic compatibility. 

With regard to the difference between realism, fantasy, and science 
fiction, Ryan says that fictional worlds of all these genres can be associated 
with the Actual World by compatibility of logical and analytical proposi- 
tions. However, the fantasy worlds (legends, fairy tales, fantastic realism) 
do not have physical and natural laws compatibility that is maintained in 
the worlds of science fiction. Science-fiction worlds have physical, logical, 
analytical, linguistic compatibility with the Actual World, but they do not 
necessarily have taxonomic compatibility (technical objects are usually 
different from those of the Actual World, and also natural species could be 
different); moreover, there is no chronological compatibility. As for Dolezel, 
even for Ryan, the maintenance or not of the natural laws of the Actual 
World is a main taxonomic criterion. 

A clearer description of science-fiction worlds can be achieved by cross- 
ing the two parameters: the structural difference (or not) from the Actual 
World and the correspondence (or not) to its physical and natural laws. 
To resume: if every fictional text describes a possible world, different in 
some respect from the actual one, fantastic narratives outline structurally 
different possible worlds. The structural difference may violate the alethic 
conditions of the Actual World (as in fantasy fiction or in fairy tales, in 


BUILDING SCIENCE-FICTION WORLDS 53 


which it involves the physical laws of the universe) or not, as is the case 
with science fiction, in which physically (or naturally) possible worlds are 
described.’ 

This distinction could enrich Eco’s typology. If every fantastic narrative 
outlines a structurally possible world—in other words, a world structurally 
different from the actual one—we can distinguish between genres like 
fantasy or fairy tales, in which the structural difference involves physical 
laws, and science fiction, in which it does not involves them.‘ 


The nature of science-fiction worlds 


The nature of science-fiction worlds therefore closely approximates Darko 
Suvin’s well-known definition of the genre: “SF is distinguished by the nar- 
rative dominance or hegemony ofa fictional ‘novum (novelty, innovation) 
validated by cognitive logic” (1979, 60). The novum, or cognitive innova- 
tion, is a phenomenon or relationship that deviates from the norm of the 
author and the implied reader’s reality. In science-fiction texts, the novum 
is “totalizing” in the sense that it entails a change to the whole universe of 
the tale (similarly to Eco’s structural differences), and is also “hegemonic”, 
because it is so central and significant to determine the world’s narrative 
logic.’ Concerning the difference between science fiction and fantasy, Suvin 
says that, in science fiction, the novum is cognitively validated, while it 
is unvalidated in fantasy fiction; “cognitively validated” means that it is 
“postulated on and validated by Cartesian and post-Baconian scientific 
method” (Suvin 1979, 64-65) and it follows an accepted scientific logic.® In 
other words, science-fiction worlds do not violate the epistemic foundations 
commonly accepted by our culture, while the worlds of fantasy invent 
different foundations.’ 

In possible world logic, we can redefine the novum as the whole set of 
properties that distinguish the possible world (W1) of the story from the 
Actual World of reference (Wo). This definition of the novum differs slightly 
from Suvin’s. For Suvin, the novum is a single dominant, a single variation 
of the real world. However, as Csicsery-Ronay has noticed: 


The model of a single novum is useful for reading narratively simple 
fictions, such as short stories and novels with relatively simple narrative 
arcs. [...] However, once fiction crosses a certain threshold of complexity 
it becomes more difficult to pin down exactly what the novum premise is. 
[...] Once a Science Fiction has several interlayed narrative arcs, novums 


54 WORLD BUILDING 


can become complex, ambiguous, and multiple. (Csicsery-Ronay 2008, 
62-63) 


For example, Philip K. Dick’s novel Ubik (1969) is based on at least three 
variants: i) the presence of individuals with parapsychological powers, 
belonging to organizations that fight each other, who are sometimes power- 
ful enough to change reality and undo events by changing the past, ii) the 
possibility for civilians to travel to the Moon regularly, iii) the “moratoria”, a 
condition whereby the deceased are kept in a state of “half-life”, lost in their 
inner realities, but still have the ability to communicate with the world of 
the living. The structural difference of Ubik’s fictional world arises from 
the intertwining of these themes. 

In effect, we could consider the history of science fiction as a progres- 
sive development of the completeness and structural complexity of its 
fictional worlds. As Wolf noted, the progressive growth in size and detail 
of imaginary worlds during the 20th century was a general trend, firstly in 
literature, which remained the primary place in which imaginary worlds 
were conceived until the middle of the century. From this point of view, 
J.R.R. Tolkien’s imaginary worlds marked a turning point. In particular, 
the presence of an organic, coherent, complex, and detailed organization 
of fictional worlds is not a starting point in science-fiction literature, but 
a goal, which actually seems to emerge fully only in some works of the 
1960s. As early as the 1950s, the fictional world of so-called “social science 
fıction”— focused on the description of future societies in which certain 
trends of today’s world were vividly exaggerated—suffered from over- 
simplification: the extrapolation, in fact, was generally based on a few 
elements that become totalizing, such as the power of advertising agencies 
in F. Pohl and C.M. Kornbluth The Space Merchants (1952), or the hegemony 
of supermarkets in Damon Knight’s Hell’s Pavement (1955). 


The Gates to the Worlds 


As we have seen, according to Pavel and Doležel, fictional worlds are incom- 
plete, “small worlds” that largely overlap with the actual one. Thus, many 
of the elements that form fictional worlds (and even imaginary worlds) 
are common to the Actual World and, as such, are often not explicitly 
described in the text. If this is true, in studying the nature of science-fiction 
and fantasy worlds, we should pay particular attention to the presence of 
“estranged” elements (Suvin 1979) that characterize these fictional worlds 


BUILDING SCIENCE-FICTION WORLDS 55 


and that are “not mimetic” of empirical reality. In this regard, the study of 
incipit is of special importance. In fact, if world construction takes place 
on the basis of clues throughout the whole text, it is usually the beginning 
that sets the genre conventions and the protocols of reading, marking the 
difference between the Actual and the Fictional Worlds and allowing the 
text to establish a non-existent but possible context, an imaginary world: 
“In most Science Fiction novels the incipit has precisely the function of 
establishing very violently this relationship. Plausibility, concreteness, 
tangibility of nonexistent; construction of a world that is ‘other’ but just as 
‘true’ as the real one” (Volli 1980, 121). 

The analysis should therefore be focused on the way in which the 
elements constituting the novum (in Suvin’s terms) occur to the reader, 
revealing the science-fiction nature of the world described by the text and 
giving a first characterization of the fictional world that is further developed 
(or denied) thereafter. Considering the different ways of presenting the 
structural difference between Actual World and Fictional World to the 
audience (reader, viewer), a short typology should include at least three 
types of incipit (Volli 1980; Arganese 1987): 

1) Initially, the Fictional World is structurally similar (compatible) with 
the Actual World; then “something” happens that changes the world- 
defining relation. This is the case with various apocalyptic fictions, like 
the one used in the movie The Road (2009)—the movie based on Cormac 
McCarthy’s novel. The film opens with a series of shots of a farmhouse 
garden full of plants and flowers, where a man and a woman are engaged 
in daily activities. The catastrophe is announced (but not explicitly shown) 
until the second sequence: at night, indoors, the man feels “something” and 
turns on all the taps at home; screeching noises and desperate cries in the 
background can be heard. The third sequence shows the man awakening 
one morning many years later, in a grey devastated land. 

2) The Fictional World is structurally different from the beginning, but 
this difference is not immediately clear to the viewer or reader due to an in- 
formation delay and a strategy of gradual revelation of novum. This creates a 
state of ambiguity that continues until an explicit science-fictional element 
awakens the reader or viewer and makes her reinterpret the information 
already received from this new perspective. An example is the beginning 
of Robert Heinlein’s novel Starship Troopers, which opens with a reference 
to a “drop” and a “ship” whose semantic value is ambiguous and can refer 
both to a current or to an estranged context. The text goes on between an 
“everyday” interpretation and a “science-fictional” interpretation of fiction 
for a couple of pages, until the word “ship” is understood to mean “starship”, 


56 WORLD BUILDING 


with the observation that the ship “stayed in orbit”, and a reference to 
the sensational gravity endured by soldiers in the “braking” of the ship 
(Arganese 1987, 20). 

3) The Fictional World is structurally different from the beginning and 
the difference is immediately made explicit thanks to information unrelated 
to an Actual World encyclopedia, such as in the Star Wars opening crawl: “It 
is a period of civil war. Rebel spaceships, strikingfrom a hidden base, have 
won their first victory against the evil Galactic Empire.” 


We will call the “first elements” of the world those elements that allow 
the reader or viewer to recognize the fictional world as science-fictional. 
The ‘first elements’ of the text are not necessarily the introduction to the 
fictional nature of the text, especially ifthe fictional nature is revealed first 
with elements that do not differ from elements of the Actual World or are 
charged by a semantic ambiguity that prevents the immediate awareness 
of their science-fictional nature.® 


Giving narrative information 


Giving information about the world (the so-called “narrative information”) 
is certainly one of the major problems in science fiction. In fact, if science- 
fiction worlds are structurally different from the Actual one, the knowledge 
that the audience should have to “fill in the gaps” (Wolf 2012) and interpret 
the texts should also be structurally different. Science-fiction worlds are 
based on a semantic “absent paradigm” (Angenot 1979) that requires an 
encyclopedia of reference (i.e. a set of knowledge about the world; Eco 1979) 
that is not that of the present world shared by the audience. Obviously, 
the audience can fill in some of the gaps by making proper conjectures 
based on their knowledge of the Actual World, or by referring to a sort of 
encyclopedia of genre, as in the case of stereotypes or recurring figures, 
such as “hyperspace”, that need not be explained time and again, and are 
usually taken for granted. However, the text should provide a larger number 
of details in order to establish the new world logic and how it differs from 
the Actual World. 

However, as Angenot notes, literary science fiction and, in particular, 
that of anticipation tales, avoids explaining every datum systematically, 
as this would be tedious and inadvisable if not contrary to the “rules” of 
the genre. Angenot (1979) observes that science-fiction readers proceed 
from the particular to the general: “he induces from the particular some 


BUILDING SCIENCE-FICTION WORLDS 57 


imagined, general rules that prolong the author's fantasies and confer 
on them plausibility. The reader engages in a conjectural reconstruction 
which ‘materializes’ the fictional universe” (15). The reason for this actu- 
ally lies in the peculiar discursive organization of a science-fiction text, 
that involves narrative information in a complex textual game (Bertetti 
1997). 

With the exception of some prophecies or literary experiments, narrative 
texts are usually not told in the future tense, even though they refer to future 
events. So there are historically two main modes of “telling the future”: 


a) The text places an eye witness in the scene, who somehow becomes 
aware of future events, and reports them at the present moment: it is the 
typical mode of prophetic texts and some early novels such as The Time 
Machine by H.G. Wells (1895). 

b) More often, the text enacts a real enunciational fiction, simulating a 
situation in which an enunciator belonging to the future addresses an 
enunciatee also belonging to the future, recounting a series of events 
that happened in their past (near or remote), a past that is always our 
future. 


Maintaining the consistency of this fictitious situation of enunciation, 
which cannot be broken without compromising the referential illusion 
requires several limitations to the carriage of information. In particular—at 
least in theory—notions that would be trivial for a fictitious narratee must 
be avoided. This is the reason why anticipation tales often take the narrative 
form ofa historical novel, travel literature, or Bildungsroman. This, of course, 
is an ideal model; de facto sf literary texts very often give information that 
would be redundant on the basis of the simulated enunciation. To some 
degree, this is generally accepted by the reader, who needs these notions 
to understand the fictional text. 

As Wolf notes, “Audiovisual media such as movies have an advantage 
when it comes to world-building” (2012, 59), as they can more easily depict 
a large number of details and have less problems related to the fictional 
instance. While a literary text has trouble justifying the description of a 
vehicle that is futuristic for the reader but actually belongs to the everyday 
reality of fictitious narratee, a film can show it without any problems. 
However, even in the movies, parts of encyclopaedic information, such as 
historical details, environmental information etc., cannot be revealed by 
the images and must be communicated (or suggested) otherwise. But, of 
course, the problem is less central than in written texts. 


58 WORLD BUILDING 
Notes 


į: Note that, in Eco’s constructivist approach, when we refer to the Actual 
World, we do not refer directly to the phenomenal world of our experience, 
but to another cultural construct, that is not different in this respect from 
fictional worlds: in fact, it would not be possible to compare entities that do 
not have the same nature. 

2. A different attempt to define sf on the basis of a typology of narrative 
worlds was made by Bandirali and Terrone: recovering Pavel’s ontologi- 
cal conception of possible worlds, they say of a primary ontology (the real 
world, traces of which are preserved in the movie) and a secondary ontology 
(the world created by the film, that is real inside the story). In any case, the 
secondary ontology is always the result of a speech act (the one of the film). 
Within this theoretical framework, Bandirali and Terrone define sf on the 
basis of the relationship of transformation between primary and secondary 
ontology. In sf, this relationship is given in terms of an ontological exten- 
sion (secondary ontology is more extensive than primary, as the inventory 
of accessible entities is broader) and a technological intensification (such 
extension is due to an epistemology and a technique, meaning “a system of 
knowledge and procedures through which thought exercises its control over 
the world” [Bandirali and Terrone 2008, 19]). This allows us to distinguish sf 
from other genres, such as the techno-thriller (in which you have a surplus 
of technology, but no ontological extension) or fantasy tales (in which the 
technological extension is not related to a technological intensification). 

3. Or, at least, if there is a difference, it is postulated on the basis of scientific 
extrapolation, as in the case of different planets or portions of universe that 
do not obey normal physical laws, such as the anomaly singularity de- 
scribed in the Kefahuchi Tract trilogy by M. John Harrison (2002-2012). 

4. This proposal is intended only as a typology of different possible worlds, 
typical of each specific genre, and not a typology of genres. We believe that 
the different nature of worlds is not a sufficient condition to define what 
a genre is: in our opinion, in fact, genres are empirical entities or, better, 
discursive institutions recognized as such by producing institutions and au- 
diences (Altman 1999); for this reason alone, they have communicative and 
pragmatic effectiveness (arousing expectations and addressing the work of 
interpretation). Not to mention that not all literary genres are distinguish- 
able on the basis of the recurring features of their narrative worlds: if it is 
true for fantasy, sf, or the historical novel, conversely a romance novel, a 
Bildungsroman or a mystery novel can share the same narrative world (or, 
at least, the same type of world, similar for example to the Actual World), 
but what sets them apart and defines them are essentially their thematic or 
narrative structures. 

5. This allows us to discriminate sf from other kinds of narratives in which 
technological or scientific innovations appear as “gadgets” with only a mar- 


BUILDING SCIENCE-FICTION WORLDS 59 


ginal role in fictional economy (for example, the invention of a new kind of 
weapon in a James Bond story), but also, as Suvin points out, from poetic 
metaphors or other literary forms that display new visions of the real, as is 
the case with Bertold Brecht’s “estrangement”. 

6. This does not mean that sf should be based solely on scientific-techno- 
logical postulates, but rather on knowledge that is generally respectful of 
scientific method and an explicit, consistent and immanent explanation of 
reality. 

7- [speak of “epistemic foundations commonly accepted by our culture” be- 
cause, of course, any distinction between natural and supernatural happen- 
ings are based on our beliefs and our encyclopedia of reference (Eco 1979). 

8. Unpublished research we have carried out on a number of classic sf novels 
has shown that these elements are mainly related (in order of frequency) 
to: I. machinery and technological objects (often means of transport); II. 
exceptional individuals (monsters, mutants, aliens, etc.); III. locations; IV. 
other elements, among which: references to future historical events, refer- 
ences or citations of media and literary texts, elements of daily life (some- 
times similar but slightly different from those of the Actual World), and 
references to news items. 


Works cited 


Altman, Rick. 1999. Film/Genre. London: British Film Institute. 

Angenot, Marc. 1979. “The Absent Paradigm: An Introduction to the Semiotics of 
Science Fiction”. Science-Fiction Studies 17: 9-19. 

Arganese, Giovanni. 1987. “La pista delle stelle: dal reale al Novum.” La città e le 
stelle 6: 18-25. 

Bandirali, Luca, and Terrone, Enrico. 2008. Nell’occhio, nel cielo. Teoria e storia del 
cinema di fantascienza. Torino: Lindau. 

Bertetti, Paolo. 1997. “Raccontare il futuro. Problemi del tempo e dell’enunciazione 
nel romanzo di anticipazione”. L'immagine riflessa NS VI-2: 335-345. 

Csicsery-Ronay, Jr. Istvan. 2008. The Seven Beauties of Science Fiction. Middleton: 
Wesleyan University Press. 

Dolezel, Lubomir. 1989. “Possible Worlds and Literary Fiction.”, In Possible Words 
in Humanities, Arts and Sciences. Proceedings of Nobel Symposium 65, edited by 
Sture Allen, 221-242. Berlin: De Gruyter. 

Dolezel, Lubomir. 1998. Heterocosmica. Fiction and Possible Words. Baltimore: John 
Hopkins University Press. 

Eco, Umberto. 1978. “Possible Worlds and Text Pragmatics: ‘Un drame bien parisien” 
Versus, 19/20: 4-72. 


60 WORLD BUILDING 


Eco, Umberto. 1979. The Role of the Reader: Explorations in the Semiotics of Texts. 
Bloomington: Indiana University Press. 

Eco, Umberto. 1984. “Science Fiction and the Art of Conjecture”, Times Literary 
Supplement 4257, November 2: 1257-1258. 

Eco, Umberto. 1990. “Piccoli mondi”, in I limiti dell’interpretazione, 193-209. Milano: 
Bompiani. 

Jenkins, Henry. 2006. Convergence culture: Where Old and New Media Collide. New 
York: New York University Press. 

Pavel, Thomas G. 1986. Fictional Worlds. Cambridge: Harvard University Press. 

Ryan, Marie-Laure. 1991. Possible Worlds, Artificial Intelligence and Narrative 
Theory. Bloomington: Indiana University Press. 

Ryan, Marie-Laure. 2005. “Possible-worlds Theory”, in The Routledge Encyclopedia 
of Narrative Theory, edited by David Herman, Manfred Jahn & Marie-Laure 
Ryan, 446-450. London: Routledge, 2005. 

Ryan, Marie-Laure. 2013. “Possible Worlds”, in The Living Handbook of Narratology, 
edited by Peter Hiihn et al. Hamburg: Hamburg University, 2013. http://www. 
Ihn.uni-hamburg.de/article/possible-worlds. [view date: 22 May 2015] 

Scholes, Robert, 1975. Structural Fabulation. Notre Dame: University of Notre 
Dame Press. 

Suvin, Darko. 1979. Metamorphosis of Science-Fiction. On the Poetic and History of 
a Literary Genre. New Haven: Yale University Press. 

Volli, Ugo, 1978. “Mondi possibili, logica, semiotica” Versus 19/20, 123-148. 

Volli, Ugo. 1980. “Gli universi paralleli della semiotica e della fantascienza”, in La 
fantascienza e la critica. Atti del Convegno internazionale di Palermo, edited by 
Luigi Russo, 113-124. Milano: Feltrinelli. 

Wolf, MarkJ.P. 2012. Building Imaginary Worlds: The Theory and History of Subcrea- 
tion. New York & London: Routledge. 


About the author 


Paolo Bertetti has a PhD in Semiotics and Psychology of Symbolic Com- 
munication. He currently teaches theories and techniques of mass com- 
munication at the University of Siena, where he is also responsible for the 
organization of teaching of the Master's degree in Business Communication. 
He has previously taught Semiotics of Audiovisual Text at the University of 
Siena, Philosophy and Theories of Languages at the Polytechnic of Turin, 
and Semiotics at the Universities of Pisa and Turin. His research interests 
concern Narratology, Analysis of Audiovisual Storytelling, Semiotic Theory, 
Semiotics of Film, and Semiotics of Text. He is also interested in the genres 


BUILDING SCIENCE-FICTION WORLDS 61 


and imagery of contemporary popular culture. He acted as former secretary 
and then vice president of the AISS, the Italian Association of Semiotic Stud- 
ies. He is on the board of directors of FELS (Federación Latinoamericana de 
semiotica). His books include: ll mito Conan (2011), Il discorso audiovisivo. 
Teorie e strumenti semiotici (2012), Lo schermo dell‘apparire (2013). His latest 
book, Transmedia Archaeology (2014; with C. Scolari and M. Freeman), was 
published by Palgrave Macmillan. 


3. “He Doesn't Look Like Sherlock 
Holmes” 


The Truth Value and Existential Status of Fictional Worlds 
and their Characters 


Julien Lapointe 


Boni, Marta (ed.), World Building. Transmedia, Fans, Industries. Amster- 
dam University Press, 2017 


DOI: 10.5117/9789089647566/CH03 


Abstract 

This chapter seeks to define the existential status and truth-value of fic- 
tional characters, with frequent appeals to multiple iterations of Sherlock 
Holmes as an example. It surveys two rival schools of thought, drawn 
from metaphysics and possible-world semantics. Alexius Meinong’s 
‘non-existent objects”, i.e. the metaphysical approach, is shown to be 
qualitatively different from how we think of fictional characters. David 
Lewis’s “truth in fiction’, derived from counterfactual logic and possible- 
world semantics, fails to address the particularities of fictional characters 
as they are represented anew across multiple iterations. By contrast, I 
advance that fictional characters are best thought of as “quasi-existent”— 
a stipulated term that conveys how their imagined existence is neither 
reducible to real-world knowledge nor is the sum of their textual itera- 
tions. In conclusion, I suggest how “quasi-existent/existence”, however 


counterintuitive, may prove productive to future theories of fiction. 
Keywords: Sherlock Holmes, nonexistent objects, truth in fiction, 
Meinong, David Lewis 

Introduction 

In an interview some years ago, Steven Moffat, co-creator of the BBC series 


Sherlock, declared the following: “I think Robert Downey Jr’s done a great 
job of being Sherlock Holmes, but I’m never, ever going to look at him and 


“HE DOESN’T LOOK LIKE SHERLOCK HOLMES” 63 


believe he actually is Sherlock Holmes. He’s too little, and he doesn’t look 
like him” (Leader 2010). It is a response any fan, author, or even general audi- 
ence member understands. We ascribe attributes to fictional entities and 
thereafter imagine them as looking and acting in a certain way. Conversely, 
we establish boundaries and limitations within which we accept a range of 
varied portrayals. Sherlock Holmes, unlike you or me, can exist in the 21st 
century, or in Victorian England.’ 

But, in accepting these multiple portrayals, is there any sense in which 
we think of them as true, or relatively correct? The very idea ofa truthful 
or correct portrayal of Sherlock Holmes seems oxymoronic. Yet the above 
quote indicates that the truth value of fictional discourse invites greater 
complexity than the simple declaration that “it’s all made up.” If that is 
the case, then questions as to the identity of a fictional character—just 
who is Sherlock Homes?—cannot be explained just in terms of his hav- 
ing originated within the mind of any single individual or collective 
authorship. 

Such concerns have already been taken up in metaphysics, possible-world 
semantics, and theories of fiction.* However, understanding fictional worlds 
as possible worlds leaves unanswered the question of what Murray Smith 
has termed “the saliency of character” Namely: we think of fictional nar- 
ratives as being about fictional characters. The latter, in turn, become the 
focus of our attention. It is, more often than not, characters that sustain 
our interest and orient our experience of fictional worlds. The problem of 
character construction, and specifically the truth value and existential 
status of fictional characters, deserves to be treated as a unique problem. 
The question now becomes: by what unique terms or even theories might 
one characterize fictional characters, in relation to truth, existence, and/ 
or fictitious worlds? Hopefully, in answering this question, we might tease 
out the hidden wisdom (or obfuscation) as to what is meant when we say 
an actor does or does not look like Sherlock Holmes. 

There are at least two philosophical answers to this: the first arises 
from metaphysics; the second, from possible-world semantics. The 
metaphysical answer is that Sherlock Holmes and, by implication, all 
fictional characters, are “nonexistent objects”: entities that do no exist, 
but retain nominal and even abstract identities all the same.* The answer 
from possible-world semantics is that fictional characters are a corollary 
to imagined worlds. Fictional characters are identified as part of fictional 
worlds, beyond which there is no theoretical need to confer upon them a 
unique identity (i.e. “nonexistent” or otherwise). Possible-world semantics 
rejects the metaphysical account, on grounds of intellectual parsimony. 


64 WORLD BUILDING 


Consequently, I will argue against both accounts. In turn, I advance that 
fictional characters hold unique identities. These identities are best 
thought of as “quasi-existent”.> 

In what follows, I first consider the theory of nonexistent objects as 
inadequate to accounts of fictional characters. I thereafter turn to theories 
of possible worlds and counterfactual logic, only to find them lacking. This, 
therefore, leads me to the quasi-existence of fictional characters, which I 
defend as argumentatively necessary. 


Meinong: Objects Nonexistent and Quasi-existent 


Alexius Meinong’s 1904 essay “The Theory of Objects” attempts nothing short 
of arguing for the viability of a philosophical discipline, developing its titular 
theory within metaphysics.° This theory advances the counterintuitive 
notion that there can be nonexistent objects: e.g. round squares and golden 
mountains. This position derives from the principle of beyond being, or 
Aussersein, which, as Meinong contends, arises from the independence of 
essence from existence, or Sosein from Sein: “that which is not in any way 
external to the Object, but constitutes its proper essence, subsists in its 
Sosein—the Sosein attaching to the Object whether the object has being 
or not” (Meinong 1960, 86). To this, Meinong adds: 


Being is not the presupposition under which knowledge finds, as it were, 
its point of attack; it is itself such a point of attack. Non-being is equally 
as good a point of attack. Furthermore, in the Sosein of each Object, 
knowledge already finds a field of activity to which it may have access 
without first answering the question concerning being or non-being, or 
without answering this question affirmatively. (ibid.) 


Aussersein in turn serves as a substitute for an earlier concept, Quasisein, or 
quasi-being, which Meinong abandoned: “Can being which is in principle 
unopposed by non-being be called being at all?” (1960, 85). Without enter- 
ing into the theoretical validity of aussersein, I argue that Meinong was 
premature in jettisoning quasi-being, or preferably quasi-existence, as it 
enjoys a special relevance to fictional representations. This entails that 
the characters populating cinematic and other fictions are ultimately of 
a different type from the logically impossible objects for which Meinong 
developed his theory of nonexistent objects. I consider why his argument 
against the logical valence of quasi-being is illegitimate; subsequently, 


“HE DOESN’T LOOK LIKE SHERLOCK HOLMES” 65 


I indicate why nonexistence cannot be applied to the likes of Sherlock 
Holmes or Dracula. 

The argument that quasi-being can neither be posited as a polar op- 
posite to being or non-being is fallible. It approximates Aristotle’s law of the 
excluded middle, albeit inaccurately: one must affirm or deny something, 
but cannot half-affirm and/or half-deny it. One must either affirm or 
deny that Sherlock Holmes is a nonexistent object. Nonetheless, denying 
that Holmes is a nonexistent object does not commit one to the view that 
Sherlock Holmes exists: one alternatively might say he subsists.’ Likewise, 
when running your finger in some water, you must either affirm or deny 
that it is cold: denying that it is cold might entail that the water is warm, a 
temperature that is, in essence, quasi-hot and quasi-cold. Two terms may 
be antithetical, but this hardly negates intermediary concepts or properties. 

More importantly, one cannot conceive of zombies and vampires in the 
same way one thinks of Meinong’s round square and golden mountain. 
Consider how one Meinong scholar describes these entities: 


we make concepts, descriptions, imaginary representations, and so on, that 
apply or fail to apply to objects, but none of these things we make are the 
objects themselves. When we imagine a particular object, we are not making 
it but picking it out of the infinite abundance of Aussersein and focusing our 
attention on it rather than on some other object. (Perszyk 1993, 257-258). 


Are we imagining a round square, an exemplar of this impossible object, 
or any round square that might correspond to this linguistic utterance (i.e. 
“round square” as a word)? Putting the matter technically, do our thoughts 
correspond to attitudes that are de dicto (i.e. about what is said) or de re (i.e. 
about the thing)?’ For Perszyk, they cannot be de dicto: 


In imagining a golden mountain, one is surely imagining that something 
is golden and a mountain, and in imagining a round square, one is surely 
imagining that something is both round and square, at least if this is 
understood de dicto. But if it is understood de dicto, it is contentious to say 
that there is a nonexistent object of the imagining. In de dicto attitudes, 
there need be no object at all, existent or nonexistent, as Russell showed. 


(258-259) 


Turning to the other side of the equation, consider again Perszyk: “Now, if 
this is not de dicto, but de re, the claim that if someone thinks of a golden 
mountain, it can at best be something that is thought or imagined to be 


66 WORLD BUILDING 


golden and a mountain [...] is surely mistaken; it is golden and a mountain, 
if this is de re.” (259). We therefore return to the paradox of beingless ob- 
jects—that in Meinong’s metaphysics, a round square is an object of sorts, 
albeit not one which exists, and that we cannot therefore individuate it 
within any referential capacity. 

While round squares and golden mountains cannot be the object of de re 
attitudes, zombies, vampires, Sherlock Holmes, and other fictional charac- 
ters can. For example, when we speak of James Bond, we usually mean Jan 
Fleming’s creation. We do not mean the real-life ornithologist from whom 
Fleming derived the name of his secret agent. Hence, our attitude to James 
Bond is de re: we refer to Fleming’s Bond, and not the ornithologist (or vice 
versa). By contrast, there is no referring the round square, insofar as it is 
invoked by Meinong, to some alternate namesake. To do so would entail 
that the round square has varied instantiations, which defeats the very 
premise that it is nonexistent. 

This brings us to the second way fictional characters are not like a round 
square. Consider the character Dracula, as originated by Bram Stoker. He is 
more than just an undead individual of protean shape and form who thrives 
on human blood. In an alternate universe in which there had never been any 
mention of vampires—by which I mean not just that there were no vampire 
tales, but that the very term and the concept it implies had not been thought 
of—“bloodsucking undead individual” would be an eligible candidate for 
beingless objecthood, alongside round squares, golden mountains, etc. When 
an ostensibly imaginary object appears within a culturally sanctified rep- 
resentational context, it achieves a different status from “beingless object.” 
The degree to which “round square” or “golden mountain” are enshrined 
within philosophical discourses moves these two terms closer into the orbit 
of Fleming’s or Stoker's respective creations. Nonetheless, they exemplify an 
argument, but they are unlikely to operate within a constructed (fictional) 
universe. On the contrary, we are not meant to imagine the existence of a 
round square, for example, but to believe in its nonexistence. Conversely, 
Hamlet makes for a rather ineffective tragedy if one reads it as a tract on the 
nonexistence of a neurasthenic prince. But this raises the question as to the 
truth value of fictional discourse and the existential status ofits characters. 


David Lewis and Counterfactuals 


We must now turn to David Lewis, who is worth citing at length on the 
topic of the truth value of fictional discourse: 


“HE DOESN’T LOOK LIKE SHERLOCK HOLMES” 67 


Reasoning about truth in fiction is very much like counterfactual reason- 
ing. We make asupposition contrary to fact [...]. But we do not use factual 
premises altogether freely, since some of them would fall victim to the 
change that takes us from actuality to the envisaged counterfactual situ- 
ation. [...] We depart from actuality as far as we must to reach a possible 
world where the counterfactual supposition comes true (and that might 
be quite far if the supposition is a fantastic one). (Lewis 1983, 269) 


Furthermore, Lewis dismisses the Meinongian approach as unduly compli- 
cated. Instead of theorizing about nonexistent objects within the context 
of fictional narratives, he proposes the concept of “inter-fictional carry- 
over” (274). By this he means that whatever knowledge one acquires about 
Sherlock Holmes in an individual story (e.g. he is a brilliant detective, suffers 
from depression, plays the violin, etc.) then applies to all other fictional 
iterations of Doyle’s creation. Without such a principle, most stories would 
pose serious challenges to our comprehension: 


I have spoken of Conan Doyle’s Holmes stories; but many other authors 
also have written Holmes story. [...] Surely many things are true in these 
satellite stories [...] because they carry over from Conan Doyle’s original 
Holmes stories. Similarly, if instead of asking what is true in the entire 
corpus of Conan Doyle’s Holmes stories we ask what is true in “The Hound 
of the Baskervilles,” we will doubtless find many things that are true in 
that story only by virtue of carry-over from Conan Doyle’s other Holmes 
stories. (ibid.). 


Inter-fictional carry-over is useful and ingenious, but it need not stamp 
out quasi-existence, nor does it address all the thorny issues that quasi- 
existence ably encompasses. 

Let us see in greater detail the logic of counterfactual reasoning, and how 
it relates to fiction. In either case, while the antecedent may be imagined, 
at least some of the preconditions for the antecedent ought to have some 
real-world basis (i.e. in our existing world). A question such as, “Would 
Shakespeare turn to filmmaking were he alive today?” invites some logical 
incertitude. To imagine Shakespeare in the picture business today, we would 
have to suppose a man born in the sixteenth century alive and well in the 
21st— either with the assistance ofa time machine or the fountain of youth. 
Arguably: the consideration that within an alternate history Shakespeare 
might have been born four centuries later is not so easily amenable to 
the problem at hand. The reasoning here is that William Shakespeare, 


68 WORLD BUILDING 


the flesh and blood human being responsible for having written several 
plays and sonnets, was who he was in part because of his genetic/DNA 
makeup, inherited from his parents. At least within a real-world context, I 
defer to Saul Kripke on this point.? To suppose otherwise would constitute 
what Lewis has otherwise termed an “impossible antecedent”, meaning a 
hypothetical reality that “differ[s] from our world in matters of philosophi- 
cal, mathematical and even logical truth” (1973, 24). 

This raises troubling prospects for a broad range of theories on counterfac- 
tual reasoning, although the difficulty may be plausibly circumvented. Take 
Willard V.O. Quine’s famous speculation on how Caesar might have fought 
if alive during the Korean War.” As Marc Lange points out, to suggest that 
this would be the same Caesar who was a Roman Emperor, and thus must 
be endowed with immortality, verges on the superfluous: the interest of the 
counterfactual involves Caesar’s skills as a military tactician, not some hy- 
pothetical defiance of mortality. Lange further indicates that the antecedent 
“If Caesar had fought in Korea” may be “consistent with [natural] law” (1993, 
263), despite his commitment to what he has dubbed nomic preservation: 
that counterfactual reasoning in logic is bound to the laws of nature." If one 
accepts this, the question remains: How to characterize the representation of 
Caesar in each and every one of these statements? In turn, if one rejects nomic 
preservation, as David Lewis does, one must still explain by what logic Caesar 
is relocated to Korea, circa 1950. No less remarkably, John Halpin invokes the 
possibility of miracles.” By contrast, I offer a simpler account as to how one 
might entertain the speculation of Caesar fighting in Korea. 

Evidently, in the above case, something of the flesh and blood human 
being of history, Julius Caesar’s biological personhood, is lost. Conversely, 
as Lange implies, a set of personal characteristics has been abstracted from 
this biological person and arraigned under a differently defined historical 
or cultural persona. This is akin to Charles S. Peirce’s precisive abstraction.’ 
Even if one rejects the latter two declarations, it seems absurd to wonder 
whether the Caesar in some alternate world who fought in Korea is still 
the Caesar of our world, albeit born of different parents. Lewis might here 
invoke his similarity of counterparts theory: Caesar in Korea is a similar 
counterpart to our Caesar, but not the same man. Without dismissing this 
stipulation altogether, I draw attention to the fact that our belief in the 
literal existence of other worlds is premised on Lewis’s insistence, which 
invites further argumentative quandaries.’* Returning to our imaginary 
world where Caesar fought in Korea, we need to envisage the latter as 
benefiting from some modified version of either subsistence or existence, 
akin to what happens with the creation of fictional characters. 


“HE DOESN’T LOOK LIKE SHERLOCK HOLMES” 69 


Lewis contends that what we believe to be true in the world is taken to 
be true in fiction, unless specified otherwise. Nonetheless, a necessary 
condition for one’s individual personhood, call it hereditary dependency, 
does not carry over into fiction, and it is never specified otherwise. In the 
BBC series Sherlock, the world of the titular detective has been updated 
so that he lives, not in Victorian England, but in the London of today. Yet, 
the show’s co-creators do not speak of displacing Holmes’s entire family 
lineage roughly a century ahead—despite the fact that his brother Mycroft 
figures in the series. Rather, it is understood that Sherlock Holmes and his 
surrounding dramatis personae (Watson, Mrs. Hudson, Mycroft, Moriarty, 
Lestrade, Irene Adler, etc.) have simply been modernized—regardless of 
whom their imaginary parents might or might not have been. 

The chromosomal makeup of fictional characters is equally far removed 
from their imagined identities, so they can switch gender from fiction 
to fiction. The most famous case in film history may be when Howard 
Hawks reimagined Hilary Johnson from The Front Page as a woman (cf. 
His Girl Friday, 1940). Recent examples, again in Sherlock Holmes, provide 
even more radical iterations. The TV series Elementary turns John Watson 
into Joan Watson and, in one spectacular plot twist, recasts Moriarty as 
a woman who adopts the (diegetically fake) persona of Irene Adler. The 
counterfactual “what ifs?” guiding this storytelling reinforce the crucial 
point that characters do not benefit from any genetic/chromosomal stability 
but still remain who they are as fictional constructs. Narratives of Dracula 
and Superman often undermine this aforementioned stability even more 
greatly. Red Son, a comic book later adapted into film, conceives of Super- 
man not as the son of Jor-El, hailing from the planet Krypton, but as a 
descendant of Lex Luthor, sent into the past in a time-travelling capsule 
from planet Earth. Wes Craven’s Dracula 2000 posits that its lead vampire 
is no longer Vlad Tepes, but Judas: here we have a case of Stoker’s vampire 
transformed from a different historical figure. In both cases—Superman 
and Dracula—the characters remain who they are meaning that Superman 
is still understood to be Superman and Dracula is still Dracula, even ifthey 
are no longer genetically who they are. Consequently, just who they are, and 
how to speak of this, becomes a capital question. 


Quasi-Existence 


To reiterate, and to state the obvious: fictional characters do not literally 
exist. More importantly, even as imaginary constructs, they lack crucial, 


70 WORLD BUILDING 


defining properties of existing objects. Chief among these is what I have 
termed hereditary dependence: that one must inevitably take into account 
her genetic/DNA constitution in individuating human beings. The same 
does not apply to fictional characters. We at least tacitly assume that they 
do possess some genetic/DNA constitution. This (presumed, imagined) 
constitution, however, may change from one textual iteration to another. 
All the same, Sherlock Holmes is still Sherlock Holmes, whether he is alive 
today or over a century ago. We tacitly accept these inconsistencies in his 
(imagined) biological and historical personhood. We equally and habitually 
do so without stipulating additional interpretive assumptions (e.g. if Sher- 
lock Holmes is living today, and not in the Victorian era, then that means 
his family lineage must have been equally displaced by over a century). 
For these reasons, fictional characters are more than the sum of their 
properties as evoked in fictional worlds.“ If this statement holds, accounts 
of fictional character-hood limited to “truth in fiction” and/or possible 
worlds are insufficient. Indeed, “truth in fiction” merely states that one 
knows the properties or distinguishing features of a character on the basis 
of an initial fictional context. One thereafter applies this knowledge in 
further contexts. For example, one knows who Sherlock Holmes is in his 
second literary appearance, The Sign of Four, on the basis of how he has 
been portrayed in his inaugural literary appearance in A Study in Scarlet. 
This is then expanded in possible-world semantics. From Doyle’s Sherlock 
to the BBC version, one simply has counterfactual alternatives of the same 
character. In other words, “What if there was a great detective living in 
London circa 1887?” is replaced by “What if there was a great detective 
living in London today?” One has stipulated alternate worlds and Sherlock 
Holmes is simply part and parcel—albeit a central part—of this world. 
But, as should be clear, the above proves inadequate. Despite factors 
such as hereditary dependence, Sherlock Holmes always remains Sherlock 
Holmes, above and beyond the defining specifications of his imagined world 
(i.e. his imagined, familial provenance). If this seems like, at best, a trifle 
inconvenient to counterfactual logic and interpretive theory, then consider 
the range of counterexamples: e.g. characters who explicitly change par- 
ents; gender; personhood; even, in at least one adaptation of a Holmes tale, 
names.” They retain a continuous identity across such inconsistencies. 
Furthermore, this continuous identity and these inconsistencies are never 
accounted for within the imagined reality of their respective worlds, or 
the “truth” of their fictitious depictions. Any way one tackles the problem, 
fictional characters are not reducible to their collective textual iterations 
and/or their collective imagined worlds. Their aforementioned continuity 


“HE DOESN’T LOOK LIKE SHERLOCK HOLMES” 71 


and inconsistencies are accounted for in terms of another unifying principle, 
which I term quasi-existence. 

By quasi-existence, I mean that, within their fictional contexts, charac- 
ters benefit from many, but not all, of the defining characteristics of actual 
human beings. Unless specified otherwise, they share many of the features 
of what Murray Smith has termed the “person schema”. As such, characters 
possess physical bodies and consciousness, as well as intentions, affects, 
and personalities. They additionally, as with real people, have ongoing 
personal histories: e.g. we know that Sherlock Holmes has faked his death. 

At the same time, even within their fictional contexts, they lack crucial 
defining characteristics of actual human beings. Hence, at any one time, 
at least a few of their defining characteristics can be subject to significant 
variation, if not incommensurable change. These pivotal changes do not 
necessarily undermine the character’s fictitious identity. What emerges 
instead is a composite portrait, which encompasses irreconcilable dis- 
crepancies, and which surpasses the truth-claims of their fictitious worlds. 
They are neither existent in the real world (i.e. as people), nor only existent 
within the delimitations of their fictional contexts (i.e. true by virtue of 
their inter-fictional carry-over). Rather, they occupy a middle-position that 
is best designated as quasi-existent. 


Conclusion 


To summarize, in terms of their imaginary or fictitious existence, fictional 
characters have been approached in two ways. Firstly, they have been 
equated with nonexistent objects, a concept derived from the metaphysics 
of Alexius Meinong. Secondly, they have been posited as corollaries to 
imagined worlds. Therefore, whatever is true within the evoked world is 
true of its characters. I have sought to show that neither account is fully 
satisfying. In terms of how they are individuated, fictional characters can- 
not be equated with Meinong’s nonexistent objects. Minimally, fictional 
characters subsist within a diegetic universe. They can be the object of 
reference, whereas nonexistent objects as invoked by Meinong cannot. This 
leads to David Lewis’s rival account of “truth in fiction”. 

However, the epistemic conditions according to which characters are 
identified are not entirely given in their evoked worlds. For example, Super- 
man is still Superman, even when he is revealed to be an Earthling and nota 
Kryptonian. Likewise, Sherlockians watching His Last Vow understand that 
“Charles Augustus Magnussen’ is really “Charles Augustus Milverton” (from 


72 WORLD BUILDING 


Doyle's “The Adventure of Charles Augustus Milverton”) despite the change 
of name.” This means that fictional characters derive their continuous 
identities from more than how they are evoked in possible worlds. Quasi- 
existence therefore designates characters’ imagined existence, above and 
beyond their multiple appearances and the irreconcilable discrepancies, 
from one appearance to the next. The term may seem counterintuitive; 
however, it remains the least unlikely characterization when juxtaposed 
with the other accounts developed so far. 

Conversely, if we can accept quasi-existence as a meaningful concept, then 
it concisely conveys the existential status of fictional beings. We understand 
that quasi-existent entities are endowed with several real-life attributes, but 
may also lack certain defining properties, even within an imagined context. 
We also understand that quasi-existent beings are more than the sum of their 
textual iterations and achieve continuity of identity independently of their 
attendant worlds. Finally, and more importantly, we equally understand that 
real-life individuals can approach quasi-existent status, when evoked within 
a make-believe context. Hence, to return to the Caesar-in-Korea thought 
experiment: Caesar becomes a quasi-existent entity, not unlike a fictional 
character. Consequently, historical fictions would be seen as constructing 
characters no less distinct from reality than fictitious individuals who have 
been invented whole cloth. If so, then the breadth and scope of what is 
understood by “world” within theories of fiction might intrude much more 
on our real world” than we might have previously imagined. 


Notes 


ıı _[ take it as an acceptable generalization that we think of the multiple ver- 
sions of Sherlock Holmes as all representing the “same” Sherlock Holmes. 
Meaning: these are alternate versions of one identical fictional character. 
Exceptions may include when a single narrative or work explicitly flags that 
there are multiple worlds and versions of what would seem to be the same 
character (e.g. Sherlock: The Abominable Bride). This hinges on the distinc- 
tion between what may be termed transworld identity and similarity of coun- 
terparts (see, in Lewis: 1973, 36-43; 1983, 266-267; and 1986, 192-220). Roughly 
speaking, Lewis argues for transworld identity within fictional worlds and 
for counterpart similarity within (non-fictional) possible worlds. I briefly 
return to this topic further on. 

2. For metaphysics, see: Parsons 1980. For possible world semantics, see: Lewis 
1983. For theories of fiction, see: Ryan 1991. 

3. See: Smith 1995, 17-39. 


“HE DOESN’T LOOK LIKE SHERLOCK HOLMES” 73 


10. 


1. 


The argument for nonexistent objects is attributed to Alexius Meinong. 
Meinong was not specifically concerned with theories of fiction. However, 
subsequent Meinongian scholars have applied his metaphysics to theories 
of fiction: see Parsons 1980, 49-60 and 175-211; see also Pasniczek 2001. I do 
not comment directly on these efforts, but indicate instead that fictional 
characters may be categorically different from nonexistent objects, as in- 
voked by Meinong. If this is so, then it should undermine the prospects for 
a Meinongian theory of fiction. At the very least, apparent non-sequiturs in 
methodology would have to be met. 

In so doing, I also cast my lot with ideal language philosophy. Namely: ordi- 
nary language cannot sufficiently account for our experience of the world, 
such that one must stipulate internally coherent and logically consistent 
terms. It is my hope that “quasi-existence” will fit the bill as per the existen- 
tial status of fictional characters. 

Meinong’s work was met with vociferous objections, chiefly from Bertrand 
Russell (see: Russell 1973, 21-93). In the many years since, Meinong has en- 
joyed a reappraisal. See, for example: Jacquette 2015, Perszyk 1993, and the 
essays collected in Griffin and Jacquette 2009. I merely argue that nonexist- 
ent objects and fictional characters are ultimately incommensurable enti- 
ties. I leave aside the intrinsic value of Meinong’s original theory. 

Typically, concrete objects exist, while abstract universals subsist. See: Rus- 
sell 1997, 100. Likewise, according to one theorist, “Sherlock Holmes’ [taken 
as rigid designator] refers to an abstract object that actually exists” (Contessa 
2009, 263). By “rigid designator’, one means, as a name, “Sherlock Holmes” 
refers to one thing, and one thing only (i.e. Doyle's fictional detective). This 
addresses the problem backwards, however, insofar that the same fictional 
character can change names from one textual iteration to the next: e.g. 
Charles Augustus Milverton, in an original story by Conan Doyle (“The Ad- 
venture of Charles Augustus Milverton”), becomes Charles August Magnus- 
sen in Sherlock: His Last Vow. I return to this problem later in the chapter. 

“I want to see a Steve McQueen film” may be interpreted differently. For de 
dicto, there would be no discrimination between the nominal actor and direc- 
tor: any film with the name in and of itself (i.e. of what is said) suffices. De re 
presupposes the opposite: either the actor or the director (i-e. of the thing: that 
whom the name denotes). This is an absurd example, devised for the sake of 
simplicity. More sophisticated distinctions along these lines have been made. 
Kripke, 1980, 113. In other respects, my inquiry differs from his: see his 
theory of fiction (Kripke, 2013, 55-78), which resembles Contessa 2009. 

The thought experiment is originally attributed to Quine, though I am 
unaware as to whether he ever published it. David Lewis makes mention of 
it without citation (1973, 66-67). 

In fact, while the term is visibly Lange's, his understanding of nomic preser- 
vation is but one possible variant, for which he is criticized (Demarest 2012). 
See also: Lange 2009. I eschew such specification in the present context. 


74 WORLD BUILDING 


12. Halpin 1991. 

13. See: Zeman 1983. 

14. See: Lewis 1986. For a sympathetic account of Lewis’s modal realism, see: 
Bricker 2006. For a critique, see Chihana 1998, 76-103. I cannot enter the de- 
bate here. Instead, I signal my agreement with Kripke that possible worlds 
are imagined entities of our devising, that need not command literal belief. 
See especially: Kripke 1980, 15-20 and 43-44. 

15. This is elsewhere phrased as the “principle of minimal departure”. See: Ryan 
1991, 48-60. 

16. It may not even be clear to what extent fictional characters have (imagined) 
essential properties. One can imagine a retelling of Sherlock Holmes in 
which he never became a famous detective living at 221B Baker Street, but 
solely devoted his life to beekeeping, away from London. The implication, 
which cannot be developed here, is that any seemingly defining aspect of 
a fictional character may be subject to radical change. A character, via her 
multiple iterations, would be identifiable more in terms of “family resem- 
blances” than by any shortlist of necessary/sufficient conditions. Conceiv- 
ably, there must also be a tipping point, beyond which the character ceases 
to be recognizable as such (i.e. Sherlock Holmes can only withstand so 
many changes—in profession, in character, even in name—beyond which 
he is transformed into a categorically different character). 

17. See: note 7, above, on Charles Augustus Milverton/Magnussen. Consider, also, 
the case of “Herlock Sholmes’, a spoof of Doyle’s creation devised by Maurice 
Leblanc. Imagine a series of “Sholmes” stories that nonetheless recapitulate, 
blow by blow, the key plot points of Doyle’s original stories. Why wouldn't this 
stand as interventions in the Holmes universe, on par with any number of 
adaptations and spin-offs? Stipulating a necessary and exclusive link between 
fictional name and identity (i.e. he cannot be Sherlock Holmes unless he is 
named Sherlock Holmes) would here seem meagre and doctrinaire. 

18. Fora fuller account, see: Smith 1995, 20-24. I paraphrase Smith, whose list 


me n, s 


includes: “a discrete human body”; “self-awareness”; “intentional states”; 
“emotions”; “persisting attributes.” (21). 

19. See: notes 7 and 17 above. 

20. Of course, this presupposes that there is only one actual world, a view chal- 
lenged most notably by Goodman 1978. I leave the matter aside, although 


Goodman’s nominalism would not undermine the views set forth here. 


Works Cited 


Bricker, Phillip. 2006. “David Lewis: On the Plurality of Worlds.” In: Central Works 
of Philosophy, Volume 5: The Twentieth Century: Quine and After, edited by John 
Shand, 246-267. Montreal: McGill-Queen’s University Press. 


“HE DOESN’T LOOK LIKE SHERLOCK HOLMES” 75 


Chihara, Charles S. 1998. The Worlds of Possibility: Modal Realism and the Semantics 
of Modal Logic. Oxford: Clarendon Press. 

Contessa, Gabriele. 2009. “Who is Afraid of Imaginary Objects?” In: Griffin and 
Jacquette, Russell vs. Meinong: The Legacy of “On Denoting.”, 248-265, New York: 
Routledge. 

Demarest, Heather. 2012. “Do Counterfactuals Ground the Laws of Nature? A 
Critique of Lange.” Philosophy of Science 79: 333-344- 

Doyle, Arthur Conan. (1904/1905) 2010. “The Adventure of Charles Augustus Mil- 
verton.” In: The Return of Sherlock Holmes, 123-137. Mineola: Dover Publications. 

Goodman, Nelson. 1978. Ways of Worldmaking. Indianapolis: Hackett Publishing 
Company. 

Griffin, Nicholas and Jacquette, Dale (eds.). 2009. Russell vs. Meinong: The Legacy 
of “On Denoting.” New York: Routledge. 

Halpin, John. 1991. “The Miraculous Conception of Counterfactuals.” Philosophical 
Studies 63 (3): 271-290. 

Jacquette, Dale. 2015. Alexius Meinong, The Shepherd of Non-Being. Cham: Springer. 

Kripke, Saul. 1980. Naming and Necessity. Oxford: Blackwell Publishers Ltd. 

—. 2013. Reference and Existence: The John Locke Lectures. Oxford: Oxford Uni- 
versity Press. 

Lange, Marc. 1993. “When Would Natural Laws Have Been Broken?” Analysis 53 
(4): 262-269. 

—. 2009. Laws and Lawmakers: Science, Metaphysics, and the Laws of Nature. 
Oxford: Oxford University Press. 

Leader, Michael. 2010. “Steven Moffat and Mark Gatiss Interview: Sherlock,” Den 
of Geek, July 21. http://www.denofgeek.com/tv/sherlock/20536/steven-moffat- 
and-mark-gatiss-interview-sherlock. 

Lewis, David. 1973. Counterfactuals. Cambridge: Harvard University Press. 

—. 1983. Philosophical Papers: Volume I. Oxford: Oxford University Press. 

—. 1986. On the Plurality of Worlds. Oxford: Oxford University Press. 

Meinong, Alexius. 1960. “The Theory of Objects.” In: Realism and the Background 
of Phenomenology, edited by Roderick M. Chisholm. 76-117. Glencoe: Free Press. 

Millar, Mark. (2003) 2014. Superman: Red Son. Burbank: DC Comics. 

Pasniczek, Jacek. 2001. “The Meinongian Logic of Fiction.” In: The School of Alexius 
Meinong, edited by Liliana Albertazzi, Dale Jacquette, and Roberto Poli. 457-476. 
Aldershot: Ashgate. 

Perszyk, Kenneth J. 1993. Nonexistent Objects: Meinong and Contemporary Philoso- 
phy. Dordrecht: Kluwer Academic Publishers. 

Russell, Bertrand. 1973. Essays in Analysis. London: George Allen & Unwin Ltd. 

—. (1912) 1997. The Problems of Philosophy. Oxford: Oxford University Press. 

Parsons, Terence. 1980. Nonexistent Objects. New Haven: Yale University Press. 


76 WORLD BUILDING 


Ryan, Marie-Laure. 1991. Possible Worlds, Artificial Intelligence, and Narrative 
Theory. Bloomington: Indiana University Press. 

Smith, Murray. 1995. Engaging Characters: Fiction, Emotion and the Cinema. Oxford: 
Clarendon Press. 

Zeman, J. Jay. 1983. “Peirce on Abstraction.” In: The Relevance of Charles Peirce, 
edited by Eugene Freeman. 293-311. La Salle: Monist Library of Philosophy. 


Media cited 


Dracula 2000. Directed by Patrick Lussier. 2000. Toronto, CA: eOne Films, 2013. 
DVD. 

Elementary: Season 1. Directed by John Polson et al. 2012-2013. Los Angeles, USA: 
Paramount Pictures Home Entertainment, 2013. DVD. 

His Girl Friday. Directed by Howard Hawks. 1940. Bridgeport, USA: American Pop 
Classics, 2012. DVD. 

Sherlock: The Abominable Bride. Directed by Douglas Mackinnon. 2016. London, 
UK: BBC Home Entertainment, 2016. Blu-ray. 

Sherlock: His Last Vow. Directed by Nick Hurran. 2014. London, UK: BBC Home 
Entertainment, 2014. Blu-ray. 


About the author 


Julien Lapointe is a PhD candidate at Concordia University. He has recently 
presented his work at the Screen Studies Conference (2014), the Udine In- 
ternational Film Conference (2015), and by invitation at the Université de 
Montréal. He has written for Film Quarterly, The Canadian Journal of Film 
Studies, and Mise au Point. Additionally, he wrote a chapter in The Legacies of 
Jean-Luc Godard (WLU Press, 2014). His doctoral thesis proposes a theory of 
cinematic representation that defines the relationship between representa- 
tion, affect, and aesthetics, drawing on analytic philosophy/logic (Frege, 
Russell), logical positivism (Carnap), and its heirs (Goodman, Chomsky), 
while also addressing classical film theory (Arnheim, Bazin), the Opojaz 
(Shklovsky), and recent cognitive film theory and/or theories of affect/ 
emotion. He hopes to pursue a post-doctorate on representations of Sherlock 
Holmes with a focus on theories of rationality, belief, and world-building. 


“Visible World” 


The Atlas as a Visual Form of Knowledge and Narrative 
Paradigm in Contemporary Art’ 


Cristina Baldacci 


Boni, Marta (ed.), World Building. Transmedia, Fans, Industries. Amster- 
dam University Press, 2017 


DOI: 10.5117/9789089647566/CHo4 


Abstract 

With his Bilderatlas dedicated to Mnemosyne, Aby Warburg anticipated a 
number of issues that would have arisen in art history only in the second 
half of the 2oth century, such as: giving primacy to visual communication; 
choosing an anthropological approach that gives value to all images; 
using a method by which to offer an overview as well as a diachronic 
look on things well before the advent of the internet. This method, which 
can be referred to as “atlas-form’”, is characterized by certain constant 
features, e.g. the montage of visual fragments, the grid arrangement, 
the simultaneous view of the singular and plural, the non-hierarchical 
relationship among the elements, heterogeneity, the open structure, 
intertextuality, the desire for wholeness, anachronism. It is therefore an 
important aesthetic and epistemic apparatus, not just in theory but also 
in artistic practice, because it allows, as Georges Didi-Huberman has 
highlighted, a continuous review of history, knowledge, and the world 
through images. This paper aims to trace the evolution of the atlas form 
as a way to rethink the organization of contemporary knowledge through 
some significant case-studies. 


Keywords: Maps, Atlas, Contemporary Art, Geography, Warburg 


Traditionally, an atlas is a systematic collection of maps with which humans 


have redefined the world. We also know that, even before designating 


maps and their representations, Atlas was the mythological Titan who, 


for the ancients, held up the sky. The Flemish geographer Gerhard Kremer 


78 WORLD BUILDING 


(1512-1594) chose Atlas for the cover of his Renaissance compendium, the 
first geographical atlas in the modern sense of the term, along with the one 
by the Flemish Abraham Ortelius (1528-1598). 

The geographical atlas as a collection of maps is literally at the fingertips 
of users as a “handy and consultable” book, as an ordered succession of 
plates (or images) striving towards completeness (Castro 2011, 165). For, as 
far as it may be detailed, exhaustive, and updated, an atlas cannot truly be 
considered complete. As Georges Didi-Huberman observes, the “multiple”, 
the “diverse”, the “hybrid”, define any type of montage, and therefore a 
map representation or combination of images. The inclusion of these 
characteristics leads to the deconstruction of “the ideals of uniqueness, 
of specificity, of purity, of total knowledge” (Didi-Huberman 2011, 13). This 
can be extended to all atlases—and not just geographical ones—since 
an atlas is always structured like a body of plates bearing images that are 
reproduced or juxtaposed. 

In fact, an atlas is not merely a scientific tool, or a sort of “geo-referential 
data” archive (Pignatti 2011, 7) allowing us to define and understand the 
world through a series of environmental information and territorial meas- 
urements. More so since information, thanks to digital mapping and satel- 
lite technology, has grown increasingly precise, accessible, and shareable.” 
“Rational and analytical knowledge’ and “creative invention” come together 
here. This union allows the atlas to be, at the same time, a description- 
representation and an interpretation-reconfiguration of the world, based 
on natural as well as social, political, and cultural phenomena. 

As Francesco Tedeschi explains in his book on the relationship between 
contemporary art and geography, geographical knowledge safeguards 


a synthesis of humanism and scientific analysis, useful in creating an 
encyclopedic outlook which isn’t and cannot be metaphysical, but which 
has a holistic connotation, where maps play a role with language and 
image (Tedeschi 2011, 18). 


It is no coincidence that the boom of picture atlases, no longer related just 
to geography or astronomy, but also to other humanistic disciplines, began 
with a predilection for encyclopedias dating back to the Enlightenment, 
reaching its climax as photography became widespread and ultimately 
replaced printed plates. From the late 1800s, photo atlases intended to 
organize knowledge gradually grew in number, and involved both old and 
new fields, such as anatomy, physiognomy, mineralogy, botany, archeology, 
and ethnography. 


“VISIBLE WORLD” 79 


Two great thinkers from the early 1900s—Walter Benjamin and Aby 
Warburg—quickly realized the narrative and visual effectiveness of atlases 
as a montage of images pertaining to a given artistic-cultural tradition. 
By commenting on one of the first avant-garde photo mapping projects, 
Menschen des 20. Jahrhunderts by August Sander, Benjamin began a far- 
reaching comparison in 1931 with the atlas as a form of visual knowledge. 
Sander had mapped German society of the age, at the twilight of the Weimar 
Republic, dividing it according to classes and professions and solely basing 
himself on “direct observation” (Benjamin [1931] 1999, 520). For Benjamin, the 
physiognomic precision with which Sander portrayed faces represented the 
predominant aspect of his work. In fact, he was convinced that these portraits 
would quickly take on “unlooked-for topicality” and prove to be not so much 
a mere “picture book” (Bilderbuch) as a “training manual” (Ubungsatlas)3 

In 1933, Sander’s project was censured by the nascent Nazi regime, as 
it was judged to be antithetical to the idealized and mono-racial propa- 
gandistic image of the German people that would eventually become one 
of the deadliest weapons of the Third Reich.* In the 1920s, Warburg also 
adopted the atlas as an epistemic-cognitive tool. His Bilderatlas dedicated 
to Mnemosyne was conceived as an instrument that could give him an 
overall vision of his research, which had enormous range. For years, he had 
followed the migrations of archetypical images, the Pathosformeln, from 
Antiquity to the Renaissance, in an attempt to single out their survival 
in contemporary visual fields. That is why his atlas also includes “high” 
and “low” images he had collected throughout his life, thus representing 
a Sisyphean attempt to create a model of cultural memory in which, as 
Benjamin H.D. Buchloh wrote: 


Western European humanist thought would once more, perhaps for the 
last time, recognize its origins and trace its latent continuities into the 
present, ranging spatially across the confines of European humanist 
culture and situating itself temporally within the parameters of European 
history from classical Antiquity to the present. (Buchloh 1999, 122) 


Warburg foresaw a series of themes that would surface later on in the 1900s, 
such as preference for visual communication, or an anthropological ap- 
proach that gives value to all images, or using, much before the advent of 
the web, a method that could offer an overall, diachronic view of things. 
“The word to the image” (Zum Bild das Wort), according to Warburg's 
famous saying, means, first of all, to think according to images. The War- 
burgian Bilderatlas was thus “a visual form of knowledge” and “a skilled 


80 WORLD BUILDING 


form of seeing” (Didi-Huberman 2011, 12), which implies precise qualities, 
such as montage or re-montage of visual fragments; grid layout; view of the 
single and the collective, contemporaneously; non-hierarchical rapport 
between things; heterogeneity; open structure; intertextuality; desire for 
thoroughness; and anachronisms. 

After Warburg, the atlas took shape not only as a theoretical epistemic 
system but also as an aesthetic form in art practice, to such an extent that 
it appears to be the tool most used in contemporary art, intended to give 
new order and meaning to the multitude of materials that make up the 
vast archive composed by our visual imaginary. Through the atlas, artists 
weave stories that, as fragmentary as they might be (both in quantity and 
variety of elements and in the infinite connections the eye of the “reader” 
is able to establish), offer a broad, composite view of the world and allow 
us to constantly reconsider stories and knowledge. 

The artists who assimilated Warburg’s teachings more than anyone 
else were those who, during the 1900s, pieced reality back together into 
personal maps or cosmologies, poised between order and disorder, old 
and new, memory and oblivion, finite and infinite.’ For artists, too, atlas 
plates or maps are tools with which to explore systematically the (inner or 
outer) world and embark upon journeys somewhere between the real and 
the fantastical. Besides, as Italo Calvino noted, the same “geographical 
map, even though it is a static object, presupposes an idea of narrative; it 
is conceived on the basis of a journey; it is an Odyssey” (Calvino 2014, 19). 

Along with space, time is the essential element of the mapping paradigm. 
That is why Calvino compared a map to a narrative structure that contains 
both “time as the history of the past” and “time as the future”; whereas, 
before him, Benjamin had reflected extensively on the possibility of “ar- 
ticulating the space [Raum] of life—Bios—graphically in a map” (Benjamin 
1979, 295). The Bios idea as a particular form of life derived from the Greek 
Aristotelian tradition of the polis also clearly includes both the notion of 
biological and philosophical time. 

Oftentimes, artists who work with the atlas model tend to cover the 
entire span of their lives or outline worlds as completely as possible, chasing 
after an unquestionably personal—but therefore thoroughly cultural— 
utopia with roots in the art of memory and in combinational logics (ars 
combinatoria) in encyclopedism. As Giorgio Mangani skillfully wrote, with 
modernity “the encyclopedia is transformed, in the esoteric and occultist 
desire to condense knowledge into limited, systematically ordered images, 
into maps [...].” Atlas maps and plates are thus transformed, gradually, into 
“machine|s] a voir” (Mangani 1983, 74-75). 


“VISIBLE WORLD” 81 


Today, one of the most emblematic cases of this newfound desire for 
completeness is Piero Manzoni who, in 1961, in a gesture poised between the 
Dadaist and Fluxus movements, erected a monolithic upside-down pedestal 
or “socle” with a globe resting on top in the remote Danish town of Herning. 
His Socle du monde is perhaps the most evocative and witty contemporary 
metaphor for an atlas, intended as a titanic bearer and as a portrayal of the 
world. A few years later, in an equally anti-conformist and playful attitude, 
Marcel Broodthaers and Alighiero Boetti created their own personal atlases. 
With La conquête de l’espace. Atlas a l'usage des artistes et des militaires 
(1975), Broodthaers poked fun at the traditional methods of measuring 
and mapping land, drawing a series of black Lilliputian silhouettes in the 
place of a geographic, historic, and political atlas. The nations, which were 
individually isolated on the page of a tiny book, were all the same size and 
arranged alphabetically. They could be distinguished only by the shapes 
of their borders. 

As indicated by the reference to artists and soldiers in the work’s second- 
ary title, for Broodthaers the heart of the matter is “the conquest of space’, 
in more than just the geographic sense. The many implications concerning 
this particular “conquest” have been expounded by Deborah Schultz, who 
sums up thusly: 


For the military it means the conquest of space in terms of land; for artists 
the conquest of the space within the works and in which their works exist; 
for astronauts (or Poe perhaps) it implies the “space race”; whilst for poets 
such as Mallarmé, the conquest concerns poetic space, the relationship 
between blanks and words, between words and the page, and overcoming 
the difficulty of writing. (Schultz 2007, 221) 


Two years later, the indefatigable mapmaker Alighiero Boetti created a 
reduced-size atlas, I mille fiumi piu lunghi del mondo (1977). Unlike Brood- 
thaers, Boetti attempted to conduct a millimetric operation of map- 
ping—lasting about seven years, and with the help of his wife Annemarie 
Sauzeau—, which, right from the start, was bound to fail. But this is of little 
importance, because his work is also a linguistic game. His intention was 
to classify existing rivers, from the biggest to the smallest, which he listed 
with each one’s name and length. 


It’s a linguistic work, born from the idea of classifications, and based on 
measurements [...]. Rivers are quite hard to measure. There are many 
methods of interpretation on the length of rivers. There are temporary, 


82 WORLD BUILDING 


seasonal rivers, and this makes classifying them difficult; some grow 
longer while others grow shorter; plus, you have to decide where to 
measure a river—in the middle, on the sides depending on the right 
and left turns (Boetti quoted in Di Pietrantonio and Levi 2004, 203). 


If rivers and their flow represent a metaphor for human existence across 
time and space for Boetti, for another Arte Povera artist—Luciano Fabro— 
the sky becomes the symbol of our “being-in-the-world.” Cielo: Davanti 
dietro destra sinistra. Tautologia (1967-1968) may appear like a realistic 
photographic reproduction of the “fiftieth part ofa star map corresponding 
to the zero moment of the year nineteen-fifty” (Fabro 1978, 58), but this 
isn’t the case. It took Fabro six months to recreate the sky, dot by dot. But 
his map cannot be read, because, in the transcription process, he changed 
how the symbols were written. This chess-like plate with imaginary, totally 
subjective portions of the sky is an investigation of time—time spent on the 
work—and on space—the space the body occupies and measures. 


Since it’s a map, it can’t reproduce the sky but only an abstraction of it. 
If you change the symbols, its abstraction is unintelligible, and only the 
long work remains. This work creates an image that crosses, that locks the 
starting point with the finishing point. In front. Behind. Right. Left. These 
are the concise expressions of those who, in the end, find themselves 
right inside the image (Fabro 1987, 181). 


As part of “auteur geographies”, an expression Omar Calabrese coined when 
defining the multiple representations of the world on the part of the 20th- 
century avant-garde artists (and not only)—for whom maps express both 
a poetical and political position, that is, reclaiming one’s own subjectivity 
within a work, even when the result appears totally objective (Calabrese 
1983, 97) we may also include the numerous projects involving photo map- 
ping born as conceptual art. In these cases, the commonly used grid layout 
is a formal and significant characteristic.° Among the many small-format 
projects, as they are for the most part collected in albums or books, it suf- 
fices to mention Svolgere la propria pelle (1970-1971) by Giuseppe Penone, or 
Autobiography by Sol LeWitt (1980). The former offers a detailed map of the 
artist’s body, whereas the latter proposes a self-portrait through a sequence 
of shots of everyday objects from his apartment-studio. If, for LeWitt, objects 
reflect his personality and lifestyle, for Penone, skin becomes the curtain 
that divides the Ego from what is other, as well as the surface where the 
body and the surroundings meet. 


“VISIBLE WORLD” 83 


Akin to these is Passport (1970). Carl Andre conceived this work as a 
collection of images that reflect him and define his identity as a man and 
an artist. Moreover, the execution is quite odd. On the pages of his passport, 
Andre overlaps a series of images photocopied with a rare Xerox color photo- 
copier from the early 1970s. Some are reproductions of his work, while others 
quote his beloved artists and intellectuals, whose works he makes his own 
to create “an x-ray of the influences and ghosts that populated his personal 
Pantheon”. “There are all of his musts,” as Massimiliano Gioni commented, 
as he included this work by Andre in his Venetian Palazzo Enciclopedico: 
“The Flemish painters, Bronzino, Rembrandt, concrete poetry [|...] Passport 
is a work that, more than others, evokes the idea of an atlas, of a catalogue 
of images, of an art history that proceeds through fragments and not ina 
linear fashion” (Gioni quoted in Baldacci 2013, 86-87). 

A similarly experimental inclination can also be found in the most 
famous Esposizioni in tempo reale by Franco Vaccari, no. 4, made specifically 
for the Venice Biennale in 1972. On inauguration day, the artist presented 
a room that was practically empty, except for a photo booth and a writing 
in four languages inviting the visitor to leave “a photographic trace” of 
his passage along the walls. Unexpectedly, the audience enthusiastically 
accepted the invitation. Numerous viewers joined in the action to such an 
extent that, as Vaccari narrated, “towards the end of the Biennale the wall 
on which they glued their photos taken in the Photomatic had about 6000 
strips” (Vaccari quoted in Paoli and Zanchetti 2012, 326). 

This mosaic of portraits was ideally similar to Sander’s photo project, 
because, despite the difference in form, it also reflected the “face of the 
times”. All in all, Vaccari’s participatory act may be considered a physiog- 
nomic atlas, but, since it is spontaneous and ofa more or less random order, 
it cannot be considered a strictly typological compendium. On the other 
hand, the photo works of Bernd and Hilla Becher make up a genuine atlas 
divided according to type. Among the masters from the so-called “Diis- 
seldorf School”, along with Gerhard Richter, the Bechers set a new course in 
the history of photography by creating an unmistakable style and process. 

For almost five decades, the subject of their investigation has been 
the austere, methodical documentation of industrial landscapes. They 
started from Germany’s countryside—more specifically, the Siegen and 
Ruhr regions in North Rhine-Westphalia, and subsequently began mapping 
across Europe and North America. Untiring travelers and reporters, they 
combed miners’ settlements from the late 1800s to early 1900s, carefully 
studying their forms and styles right before they were demolished. Right 
from the start, they realized the urgency of their task. This didn’t merely 


84 WORLD BUILDING 


mean classifying industrial archeology, but, rather, archiving memories that 
would soon be destroyed. Therefore, their goal was, firstly, an important 
cultural project that educated contemporary visions to a kind of architec- 
ture that had been neglected or, for the most part, had never been studied 
in such an analytical way. 

The Bechers’ method calls to mind the naturalistic classification of ani- 
mals, plants, and flowers, which the couple replaced with silos, gasometers, 
blast furnaces, extraction towers, and water tanks. These subjects were 
systematically photographed, catalogued, and juxtaposed, according to 
a criterion that aimed to highlight peculiarities through similarities and 
differences. Included in these attentive entries are farm homes, which are 
presented as homogenous, repetitive, geometric constructions. 

Their formal research is in keeping with American proto-minimalism 
and, in particular, with two pioneering photo series archive projects: Twenty- 
Six Gasoline Stations (1963) by Ed Ruscha and Homes for America (1966-1967) 
by Dan Graham. At that time, the work of Hans Haacke, a German artist 
who moved to New York in 1965, may also be likened to these investigations, 
even though his “real-time social systems” (1969-1975)— investigations that, 
for the most part, culminate in photo reportage—were carried out, as the 
title itself expresses, in real time and, above all, with a precise, explicit 
social-political purpose. 

In concomitance with these examples, we should also recall the everyday, 
banal, kitsch visual atlases of Hans-Peter Feldmann. Between the 1960s 
and 1970s, this artist collected a wide variety of photo images found in 
newspapers and magazines, albums and private archives, or his own black- 
and-white pictures, which he then divided according to genre: portraits 
of people, both individually or collectively (Mädchen, Familien, Filmstars, 
Fussballer, Radfahrer); places or elements of nature (Baume, Berge, Hecken, 
Strassen, Wolken); and objects (Krankenwagen, Schuhe, Segelbote, Stühle). 

Unlike the Bechers, but similar to Richter, photography for Feldmann 
possesses no particular aesthetic-stylistic qualities: it is intentionally un- 
professional. The uniqueness of each shot is given by the quantity, rather 
than the quality, since repetition does not generate addiction or uniformity. 
Instead, diversity is allowed to emerge. 

Another potentially infinite constellation of images is Atlas (1962-2013) 
by Gerhard Richter, which contains roughly 8000 photos, sketches, and 
collages that the German artist began cataloging right after he left the 
DDR. This collection was mainly born to satisfy what he calls “my desire for 
overall order and vision” (Richter quoted in Koldehoff1999, 19), but also for 
his need to remember the things and places of his past and his willingness 


“VISIBLE WORLD” 85 


to document the new path in his life as an artist. As with Warburg, Richter 
considers collecting and arranging certain images into an atlas as a practical 
necessity. In Atlas, he unites the images he uses as iconographic models for 
his paintings. But Atlas contains so much more, including the projects the 
artist never realized, souvenirs from trips, and other private photos. This 
is why it may be considered a Skizzenbuch, that is, an album that displays 
mechanical and objective reproductions of what Richter wants to recall 
from reality, instead of the drawings with which past artists represented 
and interpreted the world. 

Yet, it would be simplistic to see this as just a ready-made archive. 
Richter included, above all, amateur photos, pure and direct images, 
without any artistic worth, which—as he himself underlines—do “not 
try to do anything but report on a fact” (Richter quoted in Obrist 1995, 
23). Therefore, they are also souvenirs that make up an atlas of memories, 
a map of visual impressions, stimuli, and experiences, which are born as 
individuals but then, thanks to their day-to-day, ordinary quality, end up 
becoming the go-between for a specific cultural history. That is why we 
can affirm that Atlas has “two faces” (Baldacci, 2004): it may be seen as 
an autobiography offering the observer the opportunity to understand 
Richter’s life and thought process as well as the genesis and evolution 
of his work; and it may also be interpreted as a kind of historic novel, 
in which the images make up a dictionary of the collective history of 
perception. 

Atlas also has another peculiarity. The images, which are arranged like 
grids on cardboard, are classified according to painting genres such as 
portraits, landscapes, cityscapes, brushstroke details (abstraction), still 
lifes, and historical subjects. In his works on canvas based on these images, 
Richter aims to re-interpret traditions through contemporaneity: Atlas thus 
becomes a sort of encyclopedic manual covering art history. This twofold 
purpose—for personal and collective memory—distances Richter’s Atlas 
from the “Große Erzählungen” model (von Bismarck 2002, 116), that is, from 
vast narrations locked in on themselves that give up on all confrontation 
with the past by refusing the thought and signification process that drives 
cultural memory and the atlas genre, likening it to Foucault’s idea of het- 
erotopia, where nearness engages with distance and the visible with the 
hidden, without hierarchies of importance or duration. 

Let us close this short excursus on atlases with the Swiss duo Peter Fischli 
and David Weiss, whose Visible World (1987-2001) is explicitly referenced in 
the title.’ Their endless collection of slides arranged like a grid on long tables 
lit from behind ideally places the entire world right in front of our eyes. Thus, 


86 WORLD BUILDING 


in this case as well, we find the two-fold aspect of the atlas as a visual form 
of knowledge and as a narrative paradigm. Be it presenting reality as it truly 
is (journalistic reportage) or recreating it with visions, recollections, bits of 
information between reality and make-believe (mythopoeic stories), even 
today narrating stories remains fundamental for artists. The visual atlas, 
in its many forms (maps, plates, grids), is a symbolic form with which to 
understand and make others understand the world. 


(Translated from Italian by Emily Ligniti) 


Notes 


1. A former and different version of this essay was published in Italian as part 
of a monograph by the author. See: Baldacci 2016. 

2. The advantages and criticality of digital mapping tools, like Google Maps 
(and, in particular, Google Street View), and the influence they exert on 
contemporary aesthetics, have been studied by Andreea Breazu, who 
writes: “[...] a photographic mapping of the world looks like an eerie 
materialization of Siegfried Kracauer’s prediction from 1927 that we would 
one day witness the ‘complete reproduction of the world accessible to the 
photographic apparatus’ in an archive of photographs, seamlessly tied 
together, where the navigation is not animated, but sequential, jolting from 
one photo frame to another while buildings maintain their impenetrability. 
Google Street View is a photographic imprint of the territory, not a recon- 
struction with virtual bricks”. (Breazu 2013, 41). 

3. In this case, the English translation unfortunately changed Benjamin’s term 
by replacing “atlas” with “manual”. See: Benjamin 1999, 520. 

4. Foran analysis of the work and its interpretation by Benjamin, see: Somaini 
2012, 288-303; Belting 2013, 197. 

5. Itis no coincidence that a Warburg-tradition theorist like Didi- Huberman 
has recently curated an exhibition on atlases. See: Didi- Huberman (ed.), 
2010. 

6. On the importance maps have among conceptual artists (and not only), 
Robert Smithson wrote: “From Theatrum Orbis Terrarum of Ortelius (1570) to 
the ‘paint’-clogged maps of Jasper Johns, the map has exercised a fascina- 
tion over the mind of artists. A cartography of uninhabitable places seems 
to be developing—complete with decoy diagrams, abstract grid systems 
made of stone and tape (Carl Andre and Sol LeWitt), and electronic ‘mo- 
saic’ photomaps from Nasa. Gallery floors are being turned into collections 
of parallels and meridians” (Simithson 1996, 92). 

7.  Antilz der Zeit is the title of the first batch of 60 photos of the People of the 
20" Century published by Sander in 1929. 


“VISIBLE WORLD” 87 


8. Among the more well-known and similar cases consider, for example, the 
photo compendia of Ernst Haeckel and Karl Blossfeldt. 

9. Fischli and Weiss have made many visual compendia, all different from 
one another. We can briefly also mention here Suddently This Overview 
(1981-2006), made up of a multitude of figurines and comic scenes in clay 
narrating some, more or less, noteworthy episodes of humanity, and Sonne, 
Mond und Sterne (2008), an encyclopedic sequence of advertising cut-outs 
that, instead of giving a view of nature, reveal the capitalistic system of the 
contemporary world. 


Works cited 


Baldacci, Cristina. 2004. “Il duplice volto dell’Atlas di Gerhard Richter’, Leitmotiv: 
Motivi di estetica e filosofia delle arti, 4: 207-225. Accessed June 15, 2016. url: 
http://www.ledonline.it/leitmotiv-2001-2006/allegati/leitmotivo40413.pdf. 

Baldacci, Cristina. 2013. Sogno di sapere tutto: Intervista a Massimiliano Gioni 
sulla 55. Esposizione Internazionale d’Arte/I Dream of Knowing Everything: 
An Interview with Massimiliano Gioni on the 55th International Art Exhibition. 
Venezia: La Biennale di Venezia. 

Baldacci, Cristina. 2016. Archivi impossibili. Lossessione di fare ordine nell'arte 
contemporanea. Monza: Johan&Levi. 

Belting, Hans. 2013. Faces. Eine Geschichte des Gesichts. Miinchen: C.H. Beck. 

Benjamin, Walter. [1931] 1999. “Little History of Photography.” In: Selected Writings, 
edited by Marcus Bullock and Michael W. Jennings, vol. 2 (1927-1934), 507-530. 
Cambridge-London: The Belknap Press of Harvard University Press. 

Benjamin, Walter. [1932] 1979. “A Berlin Chronicle.” In One-Way Street, and Other 
Writings, translated by Edmund Jephcott and Kingsley Shorter, 293-348. London: 
Verso Books. 

Breazu, Andreea. 2013. “Discerning the Grain of the Digital: On Render Ghosts and 
Google Street View,” Kunstlicht, 34, 4: 37-45. url: http://www.tijdschriftkunstli- 
cht.nl/online/andreeabreazu.kunstlicht.mind%20the%2omap.pdf. 

Bruno, Giuliana. 2002. Atlas of Emotion: Journeys in Art, Architecture, and Film. 
London-New York: Verso. 

Bucher Trantow, Katrin (ed.). 2011. Vermessung der Welt: Heterotopien und Wissen- 
srdume in der Kunst/Measuring the World: Heterotopias and Knowledge Spaces 
in Art. Köln: Walther König. 

Buchloh, Benjamin H.D. 1999. “Gerhard Richter’s “Atlas”: The Anomic Archive’, 
October, 88: 117-145. 


88 WORLD BUILDING 


Calabrese, Omar. 1983. “Geografie d'autore.” In: Hic sunt leones: Geografia fantastica 
e viaggi straordinari, edited by Omar Calabrese, Renato Giovannoli, and Isabella 
Pezzini, 97-98. Milano: Electa. 

Calvino, Italo. 2014. “The Traveller in the Map.” In: Collection of Sand, 18-25. Boston- 
New York: Mariner Books. 

Castro, Teresa. 2011. La pensée cartographique des images: Cinéma et culture visuelle. 
Lyon: Aléas. 

De Melis, Federico and Andreotti, Roberto. 2000. “An interview with Giorgio 
Agamben’, Alias, 3, 19: 2-5. 

Di Pietrantonio, Giacinto and Levi, Corrado (eds.). 2004. Alighiero Boetti: Quasi 
tutto. Milano: Silvana. 

Didi-Huberman, Georges, (ed.). 2010. Atlas: How to Carry the World on One’s Back?. 
Madrid: Museo Nacional Centro de Arte Reina Sofia-Tf. Editores. 

Didi-Huberman, Georges. 2011. Atlas ou le gai savoir inquiet. Paris: Les Editions 
de Minuit. 

Fabro, Luciano. 1978. Attaccapanni. Torino: Einaudi. 

Fabro, Luciano. 1987. Luciano Fabro: Lavori 1963-1986. Torino: Allemandi. 

Flach, Sabine; Treml, Martin; and Schneider, Pablo (eds.). 2014. Warburgs Denk- 
raum: Formen, Motive, Materialien. München: Wilhelm Fink. 

Flach, Sabine; Münz-Koenen, Inge; and Streisand, Marianne (eds.). 2005. Der 
Bilderatlas im Wechsel der Künste und Medien. München: Wilhelm Fink. 

Griffioen, Roel; and van der Made, Docus (eds.). 2013. Kunstlicht, 34, 4 [Special 
issue: “Mind the Map’”]. 

Koldehoff, Stefan. 1999. “Gerhard Richter: Die Macht der Malerei”, Art: Das Kun- 
stmagazin, 12: 18-20. 

Mangani, Giorgio. 1983. “I luoghi del sapere.” In: Hic sunt leones: Geografia fantastica 
e viaggi straordinari, edited by Omar Calabrese, Renato Giovannoli, and Isabella 
Pezzini, 72-75. Milano: Electa. 

Messina, Maria Grazia. 2013. “Viaggi virtuali di Alighiero Boetti alle origini delle 
Mappe, 1967-1971”, Luomo nero, 10: 211-228. 

Obrist, Hans-Ulrich, (ed.). 1995. Gerhard Richter: The Daily Practice of Painting. 
Writings and Interviews 1962-1993. Cambridge-London: The MIT Press. 

Paoli, Silvia; and Zanchetti, Giorgio (ed.). 2012. “In tempo reale. Conversazione con 
Franco Vaccari’, Luomo nero, 9: 323-337. 

Pignatti, Lorenza (ed.). 2011. Mind the Map: Mappe, diagrammi e dispositivi car- 
tografici. Milano: Postmedia. 

Schultz, Debrah. 2007. Marcel Broodthaers: Strategy and Dialogue. Bern: Peter Lang. 

Simithson, Robert. 1996. “A Museum of Language in the Vicinity of Art.” In: Robert 
Smithson: The Collected Writings, edited by Jack D. Flam, 78-94. Berkeley-Los 
Angeles-London: University of California Press. 


“VISIBLE WORLD” 89 


Somaini, Antonio. 2012. “Un atlante su cui esercitarsi? Walter Benjamin inter- 
prete di Menschen des 20. Jahrhunderts di August Sander,” Engramma, 100: 
288-303. Accessed June 15, 2016. url: http://www.engramma.it/eOS2/index. 
php?id_articolo=1135. 

Storr, Robert (ed.). 1994. Mapping. New York: The Museum of Modern Art. 

Tedeschi, Francesco. 2011. Arte e geografia nella contemporaneita. Milano: Vita e 
Pensiero. 

von Bismarck, Beatrice, 2002. “Arena Archiv: Prozesse und Raume kiistlerischer 
Selbstarchivierung.” In: Interarchive: Archival Practices and Sites in the Contem- 
porary Art Field, edited by Beatrice von Bismarck, Hans-Peter Feldmann, and 
Hans-Ulrich Obrist, 113-119. Köln: Walther König. 


About the author 


Cristina Baldacci, PhD in contemporary art history (Inter-University 
Doctoral School Ca Foscari/Iuav, 2011), is a Postdoctoral Research Fellow 
at the Universita Iuav di Venezia. She also collaborates with both the Depart- 
ment of Philosophy and the Department of Art History at the Universita 
degli Studi di Milano, from which she graduated in 2004. She was a visiting 
scholar at both Columbia University (2009) and the City University of New 
York (2005-2006), and has taught at the Universita Cattolica del Sacro Cuore 
(2013) and the Politecnico di Milano (2008-2011) in Milan. Her research 
focuses mainly on the archive and atlas as forms of visual knowledge. Her 
publications include: Quando è scultura (co-edited with C. Ricci, et al., 2010); 
Larte del corpo (co-written with A. Vettese, Giunti, 2012); I Dream of Knowing 
Everything (with M. Gioni, La Biennale di Venezia, 2013); H. Belting, Faces. 
Eine Geschichte des Gesichts (Italian translation with P. Conte, Carocci, 
2014); Gerhard Richter. Atlas (Scalpendi, forthcoming). 


Section 2 


Economies of World Building 


A World of Disney 


Building a Transmedia Storyworld for Mickey and his 
Friends 


Matthew Freeman 


Boni, Marta (ed.), World Building. Transmedia, Fans, Industries. Amster- 
dam University Press, 2017 


DOI: 10.5117/9789089647566/CHO5 


Abstract 

This chapter will explore the building of transmedia storyworlds during 
the 1920s and 1930s. Incorporating some of the work on franchising and 
licensing, such as that done by Derek Johnson and Avi Santo (as well as my 
own work), I will outline some of the ways in which this period—against 
the backdrop of the rise of consumer culture in the US—led to the corpo- 
ratisation of transmedia storytelling as an industrial practice. Specifically, 
using The Walt Disney Company as a case study, I will explore the use 
of Disney characters as a storyworld across comic strips, cartoons, and 
merchandise, etc.— outlining some of the key industrial practices of this 
period as well as the broader cultural influences of the 1920s and 1930s 
that altogether impacted the rise and popularization of what we now see 
as transmedia storyworlds. 


Keywords: Transmedia, Storyworld, Disney, Intertextuality, Immersion 


Building fictional worlds has been the preoccupation of media creators for a 


very long time. As Marie Laure-Ryan (2008) points out, “the ability to create 


a world—or more precisely the ability to inspire the mental representation 


of a world—is the primary condition for any text to be considered a narra- 


tive.” Media texts do not merely forge stories or characters; they build worlds 


in the service of forging characters and stories. But that does not explain 


how imaginary worlds are actually built, particularly in historical contexts 


far removed from the technological convergences and innovations of the 


present media environment. What is it that holds storyworlds together 


across countless texts and media? And how do we know this? 


94 WORLD BUILDING 


Arguably the most famous imaginary world of the mid-20th century—the 
fantasy land of Walt Disney’s cartoon creations—is not typically discussed 
as a “world” at all. We readily think of Mickey Mouse and his girlfriend Min- 
nie, of Pluto and of Donald Duck, and indeed of the relationships between 
them, but what of the fictional world that surrounds these characters? 
Disney may be synonymous with those characters—colloquially known 
as the “Mouse House”—but let us not forget that, in the 1950s, Walt Disney 
quite literally built an imaginary world that its audience could enter: the 
magical Disneyland theme park. 

This chapter offers a snapshot of how transmedia storyworlds were built 
during the early- to mid-2oth century. Surveying some of the prominent 
scholarship on consumer culture and media licensing, I will first critically 
explore some of the key ways in which this period afforded world-building 
activities as anewly corporatised phenomenon. Specifically, using The Walt 
Disney Company asa case study, the chapter examines popular Disney char- 
acters (like Mickey Mouse, Minnie Mouse, Pluto and Donald Duck) as the 
creation ofa transmedia storyworld across comic strips, cartoon shorts, and 
a theme park. Having outlined some of the key industrial practices as well 
as some of the broader cultural influences of the period that impacted upon 
the rise and popularization of what we now see as transmedia story worlds, 
I then turn to a more theoretical consideration of Disney, showing how 
intertextuality and immersion were key to the way in which its storyworld 
was constructed. I do this via analysis of texts from the 1920s and 1930s 
and via reference to the construction of the Disneyland theme park in the 
1950s, exploring what the park offered as a site of fictional world building. 


The imaginary worlds of consumer culture 


World building, according to Henry Jenkins, concerns “the process of 
designing a fictional universe [...] that is sufficiently detailed to enable 
many different stories to emerge but coherent enough so that each story 
fells like it fits with the others” (2006, 335). For Jenkins, “to fully experience 
any fictional storyworld, consumers must assume the role of hunters and 
gatherers, chasing down bits of the story across media channels [...] to come 
away with aricher entertainment experience’ (2006, 21). In economic terms, 
then, world building operates on the basis that audiences will gain both a 
richer and fuller understanding ofa fictional storyworld by consuming more 
and more media texts that narrate adventures from that storyworld. Any at- 
tempt to historicize world building must account for consumer culture as a 


A WORLD OF DISNEY 95 


broad contextual backdrop; in any case, the consumerist ideology ingrained 
into Jenkins’ definition of world building suggests that its industrial history 
is closely related to the rise of consumer culture. 

This rise had meant, as James C. Davis writes, that “the industrial revo- 
lution had enabled the manufacturing of more and more goods”, and so 
“the stability of the economy required that demand be manufactured as 
well” (2007, 1). “Mass production has made mass distribution necessary’, 
asserted department store tycoon Edward Filene in 1927 (Filene 1927, 21). 
Most broadly, consumer culture was about spreading products further, 
encouraging consumption so as to keep demand at the same high level as 
supply at a time when the rise of industry brought more choice for consum- 
ers. Media creators learned to conceive of fiction not as single products, 
but as series of larger narratives that thrived on the building of imaginary 
worlds. 

Perhaps no media form told its stories as threads of a larger storyworld 
more so than the pulp magazines of the 1910s and 1920s, which exploited 
adjoining narratives to sustain a high readership. For this reason, many 
pulp magazines from this period constructed their narratives in ways that 
saw one character’s world joined with that of another, with each of these 
adjoining characters’ stories slowly coming together to form a larger sto- 
ryworld. The assumption on the part of magazine editors was that readers 
who responded favourably to one story or character would be more easily 
persuaded to read a different story featuring a different character—and 
thus purchase further editions of the same magazine—if both characters 
were seen to share the same storyworld, linking the exploits of one hero 
with those of others. 

Consider the early work of Tarzan creator Edgar Rice Burroughs. In one 
of his pulp serials called At the Earth’s Core, published inside The All-Story 
in 1914, Burroughs created a world called Pellucidar, a land inhabited by a 
species of pterodactyls called Mahars. Later entries in the series featured 
visits from Tarzan. The crossover narration was in turn reciprocated when, 
ina later story titled Tarzan and the Jewels of Opar, published in 1916 in The 
All-Story, Tarzan stumbled across the lost civilization discovered in At the 
Earth’s Core. Similarly, Burroughs’ intention for his first Tarzan sequel, The 
Return of Tarzan, was hence for his hero to “encounter a strange race living 
in the ruins ofa former great city” (Burroughs 1912, 44). Correspondingly, in 
another of Burroughs’ stories called The Land That Time Forgot—this time 
published in Blue Book Magazine in 1918—readers were presented with 
this former great city, here called Caspak, a place inhabited by dinosaurs. 
Caspak, as was revealed only at the end of this story, bordered the same 


96 WORLD BUILDING 


jungle as Tarzan’s adventures. Burroughs’ pulp fictions thus developed 
themselves into highly intertextual adventures that encouraged repeat 
consumption. 

Intertextual links between media forms also extended across different 
media. In the late-1930s, Public Opinion Quarterly revealed “a complemen- 
tary relationship between movies and magazines” (Lazarsfield 1937, 32). The 
publication concluded that there was “a clear positive relationship between 
the number of movie houses in a city and the readers of magazines” (ibid.). 
By the 1920s, for instance, the film industry had grown adept at marketing 
films in accordance with the film story’s exposure in other media. Consider 
the marketing campaign that surrounded the release of In Old Kentucky, a 
silent film produced in 1919 based on the play of the same name. The film’s 
marketing campaign included “a jazz band [that] paraded about town giving 
concerts before each performance and the stage setting of the original play 
served as the setting for the [film’s] prologue” (The Film Daily 1920,180). Such 
innovative marketing created an interactive media experience for In Old 
Kentucky that was highly immersive; the fictional storyworld of the film 
permeated the space of the cinema and even spread into the streets as audi- 
ences were steered from the venue of the story’s theatre to the cinema. This 
constituted a kind of immersive transmedia attraction, as the spectatorial 
spaces of multiple entertainment forms all operated in concert to expand 
a fictional storyworld both around and across media. 

This kind of immersive attraction emerged from the need to spread the 
mass-produced products of the industrial age. An influx in brand names 
around the early 20th century had given rise to the licensing of those 
brands—thus spreading them further across other media. Broadly, licensing 
refers to a practice of spreading a product or service beyond the confines of 
one manufacturer, who issues “the rights to manufacture products” under 
management (Jenkins 2006, 107). In many respects, licensing was the logi- 
cal response to the rise of consumer culture, for as Avi Santo writes, “as 
a professional practice, licensing is linked with the development of mass 
culture industries” (2006, 11). Early forms of licensing included comic-strip 
characters such as The Yellow Kid and Buster Brown, which were licensed as 
the faces of consumer products and soon became linked with merchandise 
such as shoes. 

The spread of licensed intellectual property across multiple media was 
followed by a continued broadening of the fictional storyworlds created 
in those media, with Disney one of the most prominent of the era. Janet 
Wasko writes that “from its inception, Disney created strong characters that 
were marketed in various forms (mostly through films and merchandise) 


A WORLD OF DISNEY 97 


throughout the world” (2001, 1). The Walt Disney Company was founded in 
1923, formed as a producer of animation before diversifying from film pro- 
duction to merchandising, television, and theme parks. Kristin Thompson 
explains that 


when Mickey Mouse rose to stardom late in the [1920s], Walt Disney li- 
censed numerous items on a large scale. For decades Disney’s was the only 
Hollywood studio that essentially ran on the franchise principle—not 
only creating tie-ins but also rereleasing his classic animated features 
regularly ... The merchandising around them remained perpetually 
current and desirable” (2007, 4). 


Even without licensing, the Disney storyworld was constructed in the 
earliest Mickey Mouse cartoons as a strange yet familiar place. It may be 
populated characters that operated as the most familiar emblems of the 
Disney brand, but, as I will now explore, its fictional storyworld was no less 
significant to building those characters. 


‘The plausible impossible’ 


In 1933, the Walt Disney Company released Mickey’s Gala Premier into 
cinemas, already the 58th cartoon short to feature Disney’s iconic Mickey 
Mouse. In several important ways, this cartoon epitomizes precisely how 
the Disney storyworld operated during this period, and indeed precisely 
how this storyworld was built. J.B. Kaufman writes of Mickey’s Gala Premier: 


In this cartoon all Hollywood, in the form of movie-star caricatures, 
turns out for the opening of Mickey Mouse’s latest picture. The film- 
within-a-film (a western bearing a loose resemblance to the 1930 Mickey 
short The Cactus Kid, but augmented with a host of new gags) rolls ‘em 
into the aisles: stars range from Douglas Fairbanks to Boris Karloff, from 
Barrymore family to Mae West, are reduced to helpless convulsions of 
laughter and eagerly cheering Mickey on, are a number of legendary 
comedians—performers familiar to the audience from decades of 
vaudeville and two-reel comedies. (Kaufman 2011, 51) 


Kaufman also points out that this cartoon ends by revealing that “this 
show of adulation turns out to be dream” (201, 51). For Kaufman, Mickey’s 
Gala Premier was but one in a string of Disney cartoons during this era 


98 WORLD BUILDING 


that marked “a subtle but distinct shift in the balance between fantasy 
and reality” (2011, 52). Disney’s Mickey Mouse-fronted cartoon shorts were 
“srounded in [...] the real, physical world [but] moved unmistakably not 
toward realism but toward a more convincing form of fantasy” (Kaufman 
2011, 52). The effect, Kaufman continues, “was one that Disney himself 
later termed ‘the plausible impossible” (2011, 52-53)—a boundless amal- 
gamation of the real and the imaginary into a single fictional storyworld 
where Disney's characters could roam free. As exemplified by Mickey’s Gala 
Premier, the fictional storyworld on display in these cartoons was one where 
imaginary creations such as a talking mouse could share the company of 
the great flesh-and-blood comedians and Hollywood legends of the era. This 
storyworld was therefore one where real films existed in the same milieu as 
artificially created ones; films-within-films became dreams-within-dreams 
amidst a narrativised collapsing of all real/imaginary binaries. 

Two distinct if equally related concepts are at work in this process of 
Disney world building: intertextuality, itself the idea that multiple texts 
exist and operate in relation to many others, and immersion, a concept that 
Jenkins defines most simply as “the consumer enter[ing] into the world of 
the story (e.g. theme parks)” (2009). Let us now examine how these two 
concepts of intertextuality and immersion informed the creation and 
expansion of the Disney storyworld across media as a place “grounded in 
[...] the real, physical world [but] moved unmistakably not toward realism 
but toward a more convincing form of fantasy” (Kaufman 2011, 52). I shall 
begin by discussing the role of intertextuality and Disney characters. 


Intertextuality 


Fictional characters are one way of understanding how storyworlds are 
held together. Scolari, Bertetti, and Freeman have called for the need to 
find new analytic categories for deciphering the way in which fictional 
characters are formed across media, arguing that “it is the case of legendary 
heroes or of modern serial characters, from Tarzan or Zorro to Harry Potter 
[...] [that character] forms itself among and through texts [...] [but] never 
completely enclosed in a single text” (2014, 45). Similarly, Marrone argues 
that a “character does not live in a single text or in a generic context with no 
textual links; it rather lives and feeds itself in the intertextual network in 
which it is constantly being retranslated” (2003, 28). Put simply, a storyworld 
is built up of characters that cross back and forth across numerous iterations 
of a storyworld, signalling to audiences that one story belongs in the same 


A WORLD OF DISNEY 99 


world as another. Today’s Marvel Cinematic Universe, with its superheroes 
like Iron Man, Captain America, Hulk, and Thor all popping up in one 
another's movies, is a notable recent example. But if character is one way 
of holding a storyworld together, then it is intertextuality that serves to 
underpin this process on a textual level. 

Julia Kristeva defines intertextuality by suggesting that multiple texts 
exist and operate in relation to others. Roland Barthes similarly argues that 
a media text is “a multidimensional space in which a variety of writings [...] 
blend and clash. The text is a tissue of quotations” (1977, 48). In other words, 
in seeing intertextuality as an expansion of story across different texts, 
as Daniela Caselli (2006, 49) proposes, intertextuality creates a scenario 
in which the meaning of a story may be built in relation not only to the 
individual story in question but also in relation to other stories that are 
invoked in the reading process. 

The same principle underpins the world building of early Disney. Martin 
Rubin has argued that the “tendency toward explicit intertextuality reached 
its most intense and overt form in the 1930s” (1990). Rubin in fact claims 
that intertextuality helped to create distinctive cartoon stars precisely via 
“topical references to popular songs, sayings, movies, plays, radio shows, 
books, magazines, celebrities, political figures, advertising slogans, etc.” 
(ibid.). 

We have already seen how Mickey’s Gala Premier populated its storyworld 
with Hollywood stars and comedians, forming intertextual connections 
with the movie world of those stars’ fictional characters. Martin Kornberger 
ascribes this intertextuality to the “ubiquitous trend began by the rise of 
mass media” upon the beginnings of consumer culture “to re-mediate the 
same content across different media. Such intertextuality creates space 
and allows for linking things in unanticipated ways” (2010, 108). In 1932's 
The Klondike Kid, for example, Mickey is seen attempting to pick up the 
coins that have been thrown at him during a variety performance, only to 
realise that one of those objects is not a coin at all but a gob of spit. Famously, 
Charlie Chaplin performed the same joke in The Vagabond sixteen years 
earlier. 

Moreover, intertextual references to figures such as Chaplin served to 
construct both the Mickey Mouse character and his storyworld. Films such 
as The Klondike Kid presented Mickey in the same silent-comedian category 
as the likes of Chaplin and Buster Keaton. Mickey was branded with the 
same outsider status that typified those screen comedians—meaning, as 
Kaufman notes, that the storyworld itself was often populated with the 
“tramps, outcasts, unfortunates living on the fringes of society” as well as 


100 WORLD BUILDING 


the famed stars of the mass media (2010, 53). There was a working-class 
directive about the screen comedians of the 1930s, a fact that often saw 
Mickey take on such roles as a hot dog vendor in The Delivery Boy (1931) or 
a construction worker in Building a Building (1933). Even Steamboat Willie 
from 1928, the first Mickey Mouse cartoon to be released, was meant as a 
parody of Buster Keaton’s Steamboat Bill Jr. from the same year. The working 
everyman quality of this era’s screen comedians indeed defined Mickey; 
as far back as 1928’s The Barn Dance, his objective was to win a date with 
Minnie Mouse, battling against far more resourceful characters. Such one- 
upmanship was the result of a further source of intertextuality. According 
to Ub Iwerks, an animator of Mickey in these early days, “Mickey Mouse 
was based on the character of Douglas Fairbanks. He was the superhero of 
his day, always winning, gallant, and swashbuckling” (Iwerks 2001, 54-55). 
Mickey was effectively a more comedic Zorro or Robin Hood, an exemplar 
of everyman camaraderie. 

But alongside Mickey Mouse were a number of supporting characters 
from the cartoon films that would feature prominently in ways that served 
to connect the storyworld across texts while building it in new direc- 
tions. The Disney storyworld was built up of characters that re-appeared 
across texts, their role within the narrative re-shuffled. Minnie Mouse has 
already been mentioned, who shared the screen alongside Mickey since 
Steamboat Willie in 1928. Pluto, originally introduced as Minnie’s floppy- 
eared dog, was first introduced in 1930’s The Picnic. Pluto was later seen 
roaming on stage in 1932’s Mickey's Revue, a cartoon that also introduced 
the dim-witted Goofy, a further staple of the Disney world, who was seen 
in the audience ofa concert hall ceremony while Mickey and Minnie try 
to perform a duet. In some cases, secondary characters such as Goofy were 
turned into the heroes of their own stories; Goofy’s first solo cartoon Goofy 
and Wilbur was released in 1939. The same intertextual transition was true 
for Donald Duck. Having stood alongside Mickey in Orphan’s Benefit (1934), 
Donald Duck soon appeared without the aid of Mickey in 1934’s The Wise 
Little Hen and in 1936's Donald and Pluto, before then leading his own Don 
Donald film in 1937. 

This intertextuality extended far beyond the cinema and the continual 
re-appearance of characters established the likes of Mickey, Minnie, Pluto 
and Goofy as character brands in and of themselves that could embrace 
multiple media—including newspaper comic strips. By the early 1930s, 
newspaper comic strips had evolved from the purely advertising avatars of 
the earliest years of the 20th century to become actual products instead; 
that is to say that comic strips contributed, as David Welky observes, to 


A WORLD OF DISNEY 101 


the “creation [of] the consumer culture” (2008, 80)—owing in large part 
to the industrial production of mass culture. The Mickey Mouse newspaper 
comic strip began life when the King Feature Syndicate approached Walt 
Disney with a proposal to license Mickey for use in a comic, first appearing 
on 13 January 1930. Jason Scott observes that the aforementioned “stable of 
Disney characters provided the basis for licensing” (Scott 2009, 42); Mickey, 
Minnie, Pluto, Goofy, and Donald Duck were all licensed under Disney’s 
partnering and policing of the King Features Syndicate. “Design and artwork 
was supplied free of charge to licensees to ensure that the images of Mickey 
Mouse and his friends were consistent with the cartoon film characters 
who might change, sometimes imperceptibly, from film to film” (Heide 
and Gilman 1994, 43). 

For the comic strip, intertextual references to the real world increasingly 
gave way to intertextual references to the Disney cartoons themselves; 
the story events of the Mickey Mouse comic strip were typically based on 
what was going on in the Mickey Mouse cartoons at the time, taking the 
storyworld in related but expansive directions. For example, the comic 
began with Goofy as Mickey’s sidekick before Goofy was granted his own 
newspaper strip. From then on, Mickey and Goofy would cross over into 
each other's comic strips, effectively linking both comics as strands of 
the same larger storyworld. By adding more existents to this larger story- 
world and by turning secondary characters into the heroes of their own 
stories—a strategy formed on the basis of intertextuality and afforded by 
licensing—Disney was granted “co-ordinated cross-promotion’, leading to 
a successful and significant development in media world building (Scott 
2009, 42). 


Immersion 


As I noted earlier, there were two conceptions at work in Disney’s world 
building, and the second one was the idea of immersion. While inter- 
textuality is about the “links between texts, operating in the perception 
and experience of audiences” (Esser, Bernal-Merino & Smith 2016, 225), 
immersion concerns the engagement of audiences around texts. Building 
on his earlier definition, Jenkins argues that transmedia story worlds are 
themselves based on a balance between immersion and extractability: “In 
immersion, the consumer enters into the world of the story (e.g. theme 
parks), while in extractability, the fan takes aspects of the story away with 
them as resources they deploy in the spaces of their everyday life (e.g. 


102 WORLD BUILDING 


items from the gift shop)” (2009). To put it another way, world building 
envisions a balance between fantasy and reality, the imaginary and the 
real. 

This particular emphasis on the shift in the balance between fantasy and 
reality, as Kaufman noted of Mickey’s Gala Premier earlier, is pertinent in 
Jean Baudrillard’s theorization of the postmodern, which is itself another 
useful tool for understanding the building of the Disney storyworld at 
this time (1994). Fittingly, Baudrillard demonstrates his key idea that the 
postmodern represents a destruction of meaning where binaries such as 
real/imaginary are abolished via Disneyland, which opened in California 
in 1955 (1994, 12-14). For Baudrillard, Disneyland encapsulates the collapse 
of the real and the unreal, allowing guests to relish in a fully immersive 
imaginary world (1994, 12-14). Paul Grainge discusses how “Disney pioneered 
the concept of the theme park in the 1950s [...] linking film interests to the 
development of rides and to associated business concerns in real estate” 
(2008, 122). Grainge then goes on to explain how 


the history of modern entertainment branding is inextricably linked 
with the Disney Company and its transition in the 1950s from a 
studio specializing in cartoon animation to a company whose ac- 
tivities would take place within, and in many ways herald, the postwar 
integration of leisure markets, connecting movie production to develop- 
ments in television, tourism, theme parks and consumer merchandise 
(2008, 44). 


Disneyland was the symbol of this transition and, by “expanding upon the 
lucrative character merchandising market that the studio had joined in 
the early 1930s” (Anderson 1994, 134), Disney created an all-encompassing 
consumer environment that Walt Disney himself described as “total mer- 
chandising” (Anderson 1994, 134). The crucial term “all-encompassing” refers 
here to the Disneyland theme park’s immersive potential to blur reality into 
fantasy. Organized around four divisions—Fantasyland, Adventureland, 
Frontierland, and Tomorrowland—Disneyland allowed audiences not only 
to simply enter a magical storyworld, but to bend the rules of plausible real- 
ity. Disneyland is a place where Mickey’s Toontown, for instance, a cartoony 
walk-through of Mickey’s home, lies in proximity to Adventureland and to 
other equally “real” attractions of “fantasy.” In effect, Disneyland became 
the living embodiment of the plausible impossible—an immersive blend 
of the real and the imaginary into a single leisure space where audiences 
could also take aspects of the storyworld back home with them as items of 


A WORLD OF DISNEY 103 


character-based merchandise that could then be deployed in their everyday 
lives. 

Disneyland’s blurring of the real and the imaginary may exemplify Jen- 
kins’ principle ofimmersion vs. extractability, but this theme continued 
to characterize the textual world of Disney. The earlier outlined Mickey’s 
Gala Premier demonstrates this perfectly: the fılm was a comedic blurring 
of the real world (where Hollywood stars and comedians exist) and the 
imaginary world (where they share this world with a talking mouse). 
Moreover, Kaufman points out that this blurring of real stars with fantasy 
stars turns out to be a dream at the end of the reel itself adds a further 
level of blurring—this time between real-life and dream. 

But this blurring of real and unreal was not specific to Mickey’s Gala 
Premier. In 1929's Plane Crazy, Mickey is seen discovering his hero Charles 
Lindbergh—the real-life aviator and inventor—in a book before attempting 
to emulate him by building and flying his own airplane. In The Barnyard 
Battle, from the same year, Mickey joins an army of mice dressed like the 
forces of the Confederate States of America to battle an army of cats dressed 
in German World War I helmets. The fusion of imaginary logic with real 
people created a dream-like storyworld where dream logic provided much 
of the comedy. In The Chain Gang (1930), for example, Mickey is a prisoner 
embarking on a prison break. In one scene, Mickey leaps over a wall, escap- 
ing into a swamp before riding away on a horse, but when the horse throws 
Mickey off a cliff, he falls not to his death but through the roof of the jail 
and finds himself back in the same prison cell. 

This illogical development of the storyworld does not stop with the 
cartoon shorts. In fact, the boundless scope of the imaginary fused with the 
real world that epitomized the joy of Disneyland also provided additional 
ways to build the larger Disney storyworld across media. An example of 
how this worked was The Grocery Boy cartoon in 1932, which saw Mickey 
reaching for the wrong doorknob; upon opening this particular door, rather 
than it leading logically to the house’s exterior, it instead results in an 
ironing board falling from the sky, knocking Mickey into another realm. 
This realm was the home of Goofy’s comic strip adventures, marking one 
of the many occasions that Mickey Mouse crossed into Goofy’s solo comic 
strips. Conceptually, of course, this example echoes both the intertextual- 
ity of Burroughs’ earlier pulps and the immersive experience of a theme 
park attraction. Disney's world building was thus ultimately driven by the 
irrational gags emerging from the intersection of the real and the unreal in 
an immersive, all-encompassing space where Disney’s branded characters 
and our real-life characters could unite. 


104 WORLD BUILDING 
Conclusion 


Given its expanse across so many media and decades, The Walt Disney 
Company is a useful case study for understanding the industrialised 
practices of world building in the 20th century. According to Scott, “Disney 
would effectively innovate new forms of repurposing and repackaging” 
(2009, 43), embodying alternative but complementary approaches to 
character-centered world building. With Disney controlling all aspects of 
their character exploitation, even for licensed products, the world building 
on display in such media products provided substantial opportunities 
for cross-promotion. In effect, world building came to equal audience 
building. 

It was, of course, the world of Disney that audiences flocked to experience 
following the opening of Disneyland. The same conceptions of intertex- 
tuality and an immersive collapse between the real and the imaginary 
underpinned the world design of Disney’s iconic theme park just as it did 
on the screen and in comics. The Disney storyworld expanded into an 
increasingly pervasive public sphere that stretched from the celluloid 
fantasy of the cinema screen to the constructed reality of the Disneyland 
theme park. Emerging as “a primal scene of brand synergy” (Grainge 2008, 
122), Disneyland defined itself as a place that brought dreams to life. While 
enjoying the rides available, audiences could defy gravity, moving at vast 
speeds and in ways that seem to violate what rational logic suggests is 
possible on Earth. The entire attraction is driven by intertextual repre- 
sentations of space flight, aliens, time travel, and lost dream-worlds—it 
is an immersive postmodern world limited neither by time, distance, nor 
size. Just as Mickey was able to leave the realm of his home and magically 
re-materialize in Goofy’s realm of adventures, effectively crossing from 
one medium to another in the process, so too are visitors of Disneyland 
constantly navigating a storyworld that embraces, absorbs, and combines 
all media. 


Works Cited 


Anderson, Christopher. 1994. Hollywood TV: The Studio System in the Fifties. Austin: 
University of Texas Press. 

Barthes, Roland. 1977. Image-Music-Text. London: Fontana. 

Baudrillard, Jean. 1994. Simulacra and Simulation. Michigan: University of Michi- 
gan Press. 


A WORLD OF DISNEY 105 


Burroughs, Edgar Rice. 1912. Letter courtesy of ERB, Inc. (December 20). 

Caselli, Daniela. 2006. Beckett’s Dantes: Intertextuality in the Fiction and Criticism. 
Manchester: Manchester University Press. 

Davis, James C. 2007. Commerce in Color: Race, Consumer Culture, and American 
Literature, 1893-1933. Michigan: University of Michigan Press. 

De Cordova, Richard. 1994. “The Mickey in Macy’s Window.” In: Disney Discourse: 
Producing the Magic Kingdom, edited by Eric Smoodin, 203- 213. London: 
Routledge, 1994. 

Dolezel, Lubomir. 2010. Possible Worlds of Fiction and History: The Postmodern 
Stage. Baltimore: The John Hopkins University Press. 

Esser, Andrea; Bernal-Merino, Miguel A.; and Smith, Ian Robert. 2016. Media Across 
Borders: Localizing TV, Film and Video Games. London: Routledge. 

Filene, Edward. 1927. “The Present Status and Future Prospects of Chains of 
Department Stores.” Paper presented at the American Economic Association, 
December 27. 

Gomery, Douglas. 1994. “Disney's Business History: A Reinterpretation.” In: Disney 
Discourse: Producing the Magic Kingdom, edited by Eric Smoodin, 71-86. London: 
Routledge, 1994. 

Grainge, Paul. 2008. Brand Hollywood: Selling Entertainment in a Global Media 
Age. London: Routledge. 

Heide, Robert; and Gilman, John. 1994. Disneyana: Classic Collectibles 1928- 1958. 
New York: Hyperion. 

Iwerks, Leslie. 2001. Ub Iwerks: The Hand Behind the Mouse. New York: Disney 
Editions. 

Jenkins, Henry. 2006. Convergence Culture: Where Old and New Media Collide. New 
York: New York University Press. 

Jenkins, Henry. 2009. “The Revenge of the Origami Unicorn: Seven Principles 
of Transmedia Storytelling.” Accessed May 31, 2016. http://henryjenkins. 


org/2009/12/the_revenge_of_the_origami_uni.html#sthash.BGv1XQiM.dpuf. 

Kaufman, J.B. 2011. “The Heir Apparent.” In: Funny Pictures: Animation and Comedy 
in Studi-Era Hollywood, edited by Daniel Goldmark and Charlie Keil, 51-68. 
California: University of California Press. 

Kornberger, Martin. 2010. Brand Society: How Brands Transform Management and 
Lifestyle. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 

Kristeva, Julia. 1980. Desire in Language: A Semiotic Approach to Literature and Art. 
New York: Columbia University Press. 

Lazarsfeld, Paul F. and Wyant, Rowena. 1937. “Magazines in go cities: Who reads 
what?” Public Opinion Quarterly, October 1937. 

Marrone, Graham. 2003. Montalbano: Origins and Transformations of a Media 
Hero. Rome: Rai-Eri. 


106 WORLD BUILDING 


Rubin, Martin. 1990. “Intertextuality in Warner Bros. Cartoons, ca. 1940.” Paper 
presented at the Annual Meeting of the Society for Cinema Studies, Washington, 
D.C. 

Ryan, Marie-Laure. 2008. “Transmedial Storytelling and Transfictionality.” 
Media and Narrative. Accessed March, 11 2013. http://users.frii.com/mlryan/ 
transmedia.html. 

San Francisco Examiner. 1936. 4 April. 

Santo, Avi. 2006. “Transmedia Brand Licensing Prior to Conglomeration: George 
Trendle and the Lone Ranger and Green Hornet Brands, 1933-1966.” PhD diss., 
University of Texas. 

Santo, Avi. 2010. “Batman versus The Green Hornet: The Merchandisable TV Text 
and the Paradox of Licensing in the Classical Network Era.” Cinema Journal 
49:2: 63-85. 

Scolari, Carlos A.; Bertetti, Paolo; and Freeman, Matthew. 2014. Transmedia 
Archaeology: Storytelling in the Borderlines of Science Fiction, Comics and Pulp 
Magazines. Basingstoke: Palgrave Macmillan. 

Scott, Jason. 2009. “The Character-Orientated Franchise: Promotion and Exploi- 
tation of Pre-Sold Characters in American Film, 1913-1950.” Scope: An Online 
Journal of Film and Television Studies 24: 34-55. 

The Film Daily. 1920. 19 January. 

Thompson, Kristin. 2007. The Frodo Franchise: The Lord of the Rings and Modern 
Hollywood. California: University of California Press. 

Wasko, Janet. 2001. Understanding Disney: The Manufacture of Fantasy. Cambridge: 
Polity. 

Welky, David. 2008. Everything was Better in America: Print Culture in the Great 
Depression. Chicago: University of Illinois Press. 

Wells, Paul. 2002. Animation and America. Edinburgh: Edinburgh University 
Press. 

Wolf, MarkJ. P. 2012. Building Imaginary Worlds: The Theory and History of Subcrea- 
tion. London: Routledge. 

Zipes, Jack. 1997. Happily Ever After: Fairy Tales, Children and the Culture Industry. 
London: Routledge. 


Media Cited 


Building a Building Directed by David Hand. 1933. California: Walt Disney Anima- 
tion Studios. Online: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=qcuo5HJsVPo. 

Don Donald. Directed Ben Sharpsteen. 1937. California: Walt Disney Animation 
Studios. Online: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=2zpFeiJp2ik. 


A WORLD OF DISNEY 107 


Goofy and Wilbur. Directed by Dick Huemer. 1939. California: Walt Disney Anima- 
tion Studios. Online: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=oN5eHe1-dgl. 

In Old Kentucky. Directed by Marshall Neilan. 1919. First National Attractions. 
Online: http://www. filmweb.pl/film/In+Old+Kentucky-1927-172865/descs. 
Mickey’s Gala Premier. Directed by Burt Gillett. 1933. California: Walt Disney 

Animation Studios. Online: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=SldHEjlz4so. 

Mickey’s Revue. Directed by Wilfred Jackson. 1932. California: Walt Disney Anima- 
tion Studios. Online: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ozfBAn_RoDE. 

Orphan’s Benefit. Directed by Wilfred Jackson. 1934. California: Walt Disney 
Animation Studios. Online: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=QTJrSybNoLA. 

Plane Crazy. Directed by Walt Disney and Ub Iwerks. 1929. California: Walt Disney 
Animation Studios. Online: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=oUS8x4xZ3m4. 

Steamboat Bill Jr. Directed by Charles Reisner. 1928. California: United Artists, 
2006. Blu Ray. 

Steamboat Willie. Directed by Walt Disney and Ub Iwerks. 1928. California: 
Walt Disney Animation Studios. Online: https://www.youtube.com/ 
watch?v=7NQyzcDnMdE. 

The Barn Dance. Directed by Walt Disney. 1928. California: Walt Disney Animation 
Studios. Online: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=soBUnhc_Xzo. 

The Barnyard Battle. Directed by Ub Iwerks. 1929. California: Walt Disney Anima- 
tion Studios. Online: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=isHDIOSSI-s. 

The Chain Gang. Directed by Burt Gillett. 1930. California: Walt Disney Animation 
Studios. Online: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=elvi2pLu_zQ. 

The Delivery Boy. Directed by Burt Gillett. 1931. California: Walt Disney Animation 
Studios. Online: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ynBYb8KJBYc. 

The Grocery Boy. Directed by Wilfred Jackson. 1932. California: Walt Disney Anima- 
tion Studios. Online: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=8Dz6poE8WAs. 

The Klondike Kid. Directed by Wilfred Jackson. 1932. California: Walt Disney 
Animation Studios. Online: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=omf2zRm2Hzs. 

The Vagabond. Directed by Charles Chaplin. 1916. California: Mutual Film. Online: 
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=9dVjXNivmn4. 


About the author 


Dr. Matthew Freeman is Senior Lecturer in Media and Communication 
at Bath Spa University and Director of its Media Convergence Research 
Centre. He is the author of Historicising Transmedia Storytelling: Early 
Twentieth-Century Transmedia Story Worlds (Routledge, 2017), Industrial Ap- 
proaches to Media: A Methodological Gateway to Industry Studies (Palgrave 


108 WORLD BUILDING 


Macmillan, 2016), and the co-author (with Carlos Scolari and Paolo Bertetti) 
of Transmedia Archaeology: Storytelling in the Borderlines of Science Fiction, 
Comics and Pulp Magazines (Palgrave Pivot, 2014). He has published articles 
on the history of transmedia storytelling, media branding, and convergence 
cultures in journals such as The International Journal of Cultural Stud- 
ies, Historical Journal of Film, Radio and Television, and International Journal 
of Communication. 


6. World-Building Logics and Copyright 
The Dark Knight and the Great Detective 


Roberta Pearson 


Boni, Marta (ed.), World Building. Transmedia, Fans, Industries. Amster- 
dam University Press, 2017 


DOI: 10.5117/9789089647566/CHo6 


Abstract 

Derek Johnson says that the term franchise has become “cultural short- 
hand for understanding the expansion of cultural production across 
different media and industry sectors”. From this perspective, it makes 
sense to speak of a Holmes franchise, since texts featuring the character 
appear across all media and across all industry sectors. However, this 
franchise differs from others such as Star Wars or Harry Potter because 
it lacks a central and coordinating holder of the intellectual property. My 
contribution will explore the implications of Holmes’ copyright status for 
the production, circulation, and reception of Holmes texts in the early 
21° century. I will argue that the lack of a guiding corporate hand results 
in extremely divergent representations of the story world and character 
across different media platforms. 


Keywords: Narrative, Copyright, Batman, Sherlock Holmes, Fictional 
worlds 


Estate Of “Sherlock Holmes” Author Loses Case Seeking To Stop Others’ Use Of 
Character Fan-fictioners, slash-fictioners, pulp-o-philes, rationalists, positivists, 
Victorians, colonials, imperials, Freudians, Londoners, cokeheads, and crime 
solvers of the world — rejoice! 


(Mora 2014) 


These Buzzfeed headlines announce that, after protracted legal wrangling, 
Sherlock Holmes, the 127-year-old fictional detective, had been freed from 
copyright constraints. From the initiation of plaintiff Leslie Klinger’s 


110 WORLD BUILDING 


motion for summary judgement against the Conan Doyle Estate in a United 
States District Court in February 2013 to the United States Supreme Court’s 
refusal to consider the case in November 2014, leading news outlets, includ- 
ing The New York Times, The Washington Post, The Los Angeles Times, The 
Guardian, The Independent, and the BBC, covered the copyright dispute. 
The character’s global ubiquity and popularity motivated this coverage, 
but so did the dispute’s potential implications for the copyright status of 
other serialized fictional characters. Some saw the plaintiff's success in the 
case as a broader victory for those maintaining that endlessly extended and 
rigorously enforced copyright stifles creativity.’ As Holmes fan fiction-ers 
and slash fiction-ers rejoiced, so did critics hoping to reform the current 
US intellectual property regime and fans hoping to free other fictional 
characters from their legal shackles. But the Holmes copyright case also 
serves as a forceful reminder to academics that the beloved fictional worlds 
we study rest upon the legal and business practices that create, sustain, 
and protect them. 

The ab initio legal practice is the state’s granting of the exclusive 
ownership of intellectual property (IP) to individuals or corporations; IP 
consists of copyright, trademark, and patents. The last has no pertinence 
to fictional worlds. The first two can both be deployed to maintain the 
exclusive ownership of fictional worlds; copyright protects an entire work 
for a specified period of time while trademark, which never expires, can 
protect specific elements of a work such as characters. This chapter focuses 
on the former since, despite its eventual expiration, it is generally seen as 
the stronger means of protection (Rosenblatt 2015, 565). IP enables the 
business practices of franchising and branding that build many popular 
fictional worlds from Star Trek to Lord of the Rings to Harry Potter. Derek 
Johnson offers a succinct definition of franchising as “the continuous 
production of culture from intellectual property resources shared across 
multiple sites of production” (Johnson 2013, 4). The corporations owning 
the IP use branding to link these multiple sites of production in the public 
mind. As Claire Parody says, “the production of an entertainment franchise 
is coterminously the development and management of a fictional brand’ 
that ‘involves the creation of icons, names, concepts, and similar objects 
of intellectual property]...]” (Parody 2011, 214). 

Fictional worlds built around IP are deemed proprietary; some fictional 
worlds are non-proprietary, or, in other words, are in the public domain 
(PD). PD is a contested term; I use it here in its narrowest definition, 
which Elizabeth L. Rosenblatt says “includes only information outside 
the scope of formal intellectual property protection: [...] [such as] works 


WORLD-BUILDING LOGICS AND COPYRIGHT 111 


of authorship too old to be [...] copyrighted [...]” (2015, 570). PD also refers 
to works, such as Sherlock Holmes, in which copyright has lapsed. Since 
the inception of the industrialized production of popular culture in 
the 19 century, non-proprietary fictional worlds (centered around, for 
example, folk heroes such as Robin Hood and religious mythologies such 
as the Norse gods) have expanded in the PD where Sherlock Holmes now 
joins them. These PD fictional worlds both resemble and differ from 
proprietary fictional worlds since the presence or absence of a central 
coordinating rights holder inflects world building. Narrative logics also 
inflect world building. Since fictional worlds tell stories, they must be 
understood not only from a legal and business perspective but also from 
the perspective of narrative theory. Both proprietary and PD fictional 
worlds depend upon narrative logics to link the various elements of the 
world together; I argue that fictional worlds can be linked by storyworld, 
character, or author. 

This chapter first discusses the three narrative logics, then constructs 
a table displaying the intersection of these logics with different copyright 
conditions. Finally, it analyses two case studies of character-centered 
fictional worlds, Batman and Sherlock Holmes, to illustrate how copyright 
accounts for some of the differences between two similar fictional worlds 
and characters. 


World-Building Logics 
In discussing transmedia storytelling, Henry Jenkins observes that 


narrative represents simply one kind of transmedia logic which is shaping 
the contemporary entertainment realm. We might identify a range of 
others — including branding, spectacle, performance, games, perhaps 
others — which can operate either independently or may be combined 
within any given entertainment experience. (Jenkins 2009) 


As distinct from Jenkins, I am concerned with narrative and not with 
the other logics that he enumerates. I am also concerned with world 
building and not with transmedia storytelling; the former is a necessary 
condition for but not coterminous with the latter. While we tend to 
associate world building with multiple texts across multiple media and 
while my two case studies constitute such expanded fictional worlds, 
all fictions—of whatever length and in whichever medium—must have 


112 WORLD BUILDING 


the basic elements of narrative; these include a possible world distinct 
to some extent from contemporary or historical “reality.” Marie-Laure 
Ryan says that a narrative text “brings a world to mind (setting) and 
populates it with intelligent agents (characters). These agents participate 
in actions and happenings (events, plot), which cause global changes to 
the narrative world” (Ryan 2004, 337). Ryan identifies two of the three 
world-building logics listed above, setting, which I call storyworld, and 
character. Fictional worlds exceeding the confines of one text and some- 
times of one medium can be narratively linked by storyworld, character, 
and author, all of which serve as signposts guiding the consumer from 
one installment to the next. With many expanded fictional worlds one 
logic dominates, while the other two play secondary roles: for example, 
the Star Trek and Lord of the Rings worlds are linked by storyworld; the 
Batman and Sherlock Holmes worlds by character; and Great Expectations 
and Bleak House by author. 


1) Storyworld 


Ryan says that an expanded storyworld encompassing multiple texts “must 
possess invariant features in order to be recognized as the common frame 
of reference of diverse documents” (Ryan 2013, 383). These invariant features 
consist of: “1. An inventory of existents comprising (a) species, objects, and 
social institutions [...] and (b) the cast of individual characters [...] 2. A 
folklore relating to the existents 3. A space with certain topographic features 
4. A set of natural laws 5. A set of social rules and values” (Ryan 2013, 364). 
There are also variant features: “6. Physical events that bring changes to 
the existents 7. Mental events that give significance to the physical events” 
(Ryan 2013, 364). These features serve to specify any expanded storyworld: 
for example, with regard to social institutions, Star Trek has Star Fleet 
Academy while Harry Potter has Hogwarts; with regard to natural laws, 
the former has advanced technologies while the latter has magic. The more 
detailed the inventory of invariant and variant features, the greater the 
capacity for expansion; as Parody says, world building involves creating 
“narrative spaces vast in their scope and minute in their detail, wholesale 
envisionings of millennia of fictional history, and continents of imaginary 
geography” (Parody 2011, 214). But no matter how expansive the storyworld, 
the multiple texts composing it are linked together to a greater or lesser 
extent by the recurrence of the invariant features and the recollection of 
the variant features. The presence, absence, or modification of the invari- 
ant/variant features in individual instantiations of the storyworld signify 


WORLD-BUILDING LOGICS AND COPYRIGHT 113 


the strength or weakness of the links and can lead to debates concerning 
narrative coherence, consistency, and canonicity. 


2) Character 


While all fictional worlds must have characters, some expanded fictional 
worlds become identified primarily with a chief protagonist, such as 
Batman or Sherlock Holmes, who recurs in all narrative installments. 
Character is a more elusive concept than storyworld; indeed, it is one of 
the most elusive concepts in narrative theory: characters are constructed 
by textual semiotic codes but achieve an almost independent existence 
as a sentient being in a reader or viewer's mind. Says Seymour Chatman: 
“Too often do we recall fictional characters vividly, yet not a single word 
of the text in which they came alive; indeed, I venture to say that readers 
generally remember characters that way” (Chatman 1978, 118-119). How- 
ever, the perplexing dual nature of fictional characters does not absolve 
us from trying to identify the semiotic codes which construct them and 
from which the reader or viewer’s mind assembles them. I have previously 
argued that television characters are constituted from the following 
components: 1) psychological traits/habitual behaviours; 2) physical 
traits/appearance; 3) speech patterns; 4) biography; 5) interactions with 
other characters; and 6) environment, which Ryan refers to as setting.’ 
Although conceived with regard to television, these components serve 
to identify characters in texts of any length or in any medium, although 
a short story will provide fewer details than a long-form television series 
and different media will use different semiotic codes to construct the 
six components and, thus, the character. As is the case with storyworlds, 
the presence, absence, or modification of the six components signifies 
the strength or weakness of the links between individual installments 
and can lead to debates concerning narrative coherence, consistency, 
and canonicity. 


3) Author 


While all fictional worlds require storyworlds and characters, not all 
fictional worlds require authors, at least in the sense of a designated 
individual who created the first instantiation of the world. As Thomas 
Leitch points out with respect to Robin Hood, “instead of one source 
for the story of the outlaw’s adventures, there are a hundred sources, 
none of which constitutes a definitive urtext against which derivative 


114 WORLD BUILDING 


works can be measured” (Leitch 2008, 23). The same holds true for other 
characters from folklore and myth such as King Arthur and Thor. In 
many cases, however, a designated individual serves to link together the 
various narrative installments of a fictional world. According to Michel 
Foucault, an author’s name “is functional in that it serves as a means of 
classification. A name can group together a number of texts and thus 
differentiate them from others” (Foucault 1977, 123). Matthew Freeman 
proposes that 


this notion of classification, which works to group together a number of 
texts and differentiate them from others, [can] be taken one step further 
and [...] broken down into two standards of authorship, or rather two 
‘author-functions’ [...] The first standard of authorship concerns the Fou- 
cauldian notion that the mere presence of an author’s name on a media 
text [...] can point audiences across multiple media to other texts that 
constitute a [fictional world]. We can call this the market author-function. 
The second standard of authorship concerns the way that an author 
can impose and maintain the description of what does and does not 
constitute a particular fictional [world]|...]. We can call this the textual 
author-function. (Freeman 2015, 71) 


I further propose that the textual author function can, in some instances, 
serve an additional purpose to identify a fictional world comprised of all an 
author’s works, even when those works are not linked as individual install- 
ments ofa larger and relatively coherent narrative composed of invariant/ 
variant storyworld features. Dudley Andrew says that 


the world of Dickens |...] is larger than the particular rendition of it which 
we call Oliver Twist. It includes versions we call David Copperfield and The 
Pickwick Papers too. In fact, it is larger than the sum of novels Dickens 
wrote, existing as a set of paradigms, a global source from which he could 
draw” (Andrew 1984, 39). 


Others can also draw from this global source, as attested to by the adjec- 
tive “Dickensian” and the theme park Dickens World, in Chatham, Kent, 
which takes visitors “back in time to the Victorian England that Charles 
Dickens knew and wrote about in his novels and short stories”. Although 
there are neither an adjectival form nor an equivalent real-world theme 
park for Jane Austen, a fictional Austenland appears in the novel of that 
name (Hale 2007) and its film adaptation. However, while storyworld and 


WORLD-BUILDING LOGICS AND COPYRIGHT 115 


character are textual attributes of an expanded fictional world, authorship 
is a paratextual attribute. But, like storyworld and character, it signifies a 
specific fictional world, in this case, one composed of characters, settings, 
events, and style seen as characteristic of a particular author’s oeuvre. 
This can also hold true for corporate authors as in the case of Disney’s 
animated features; the company’s franchising and branding practices 
strengthen the textual links forged by a relative degree of consistency 
with regard to characters, settings, events, and visual style. 


World -Building Logics and Copyright 


Storyworld, character, and author underpin fictional world expansion, 

serving as the primary or secondary narrative logics linking individual 

installments. But the presence or absence of a rights holder also structures 
world building. The construction and expansion of fictional worlds needs to 
be understood with reference to both world-building logics and copyright. 

These rights can be held by a corporate author, by an individual author, or 

by no one. 

1) Corporate author: The urtext(s) originated within a corporation that 
held the rights to its employees’ creations. The copyright takes effect 
from the date of first publication and expires after a specified period 
of time. 

2) Individual author: The urtext(s) were copyrighted by an author who 
may pass them on as part of her estate. Copyright expires at a specified 
period of time from the author’s death. 

3) Public domain (no rights holder): The urtext(s) originated before intel- 
lectual property laws or have entered the public domain. Authors of 
works based on PD fictional worlds can acquire copyright to their new 
creations. 


In the first two instances, a rights holder can exercise a greater or lesser 
degree of control over the expansion ofa fictional world; some corporate and 
individual authors actively exploit world-building logics to forge the strong 
links that lead to narrative coherence and consistency while others do not. 
In the case of PD fictional worlds, world-building logics alone determine 
the strength of the links and thus the degree of narrative coherence and 
consistency. 

The following table cross-tabulates world-building logics with copyright 
status and provides an illustrative example for each resultant cell. 


116 


WORLD BUILDING 


Copyright status 


A) storyworld 


B) character 


C) author 


1) Individual author 
2) Corporate author 


3) Public domain 
from inception 


4) Public domain 
as result of lapsed 
copyright 


1A) Lord of the Rings 
2A) Star Trek 


3A) Asgaard (Norse 
mythology) 


4A) H. P. Lovecraft’s 
Cthulhu Mythos 
(disputed) 


1B) James Bond 


2B) Batman 


3B) Robin Hood 


4B) Sherlock Holmes 


1C) Edgar Rice 
Burroughs (disputed) 
2C) Franchise bran- 
ding (e.g. Disney) 

3C) Shakespeare 


4C) Dickens 


6.1 World Building Logics 


The table raises the question of which combinations of world-building logics 


and copyright conditions result in relatively coherent and consistent worlds 


and which result in relatively less coherent and consistent worlds. In other 
words, which combinations build the strongest links between individual 
installments of an expanded fictional world and result in the greatest degree 


of narrative coherence and consistency? And by what precise criteria do 


we measure coherence and consistency? Unfortunately, word limitations 


prohibit expansion upon each of the table’s twelve cells to address these 


issues; I would hope that my fellow scholars may be inspired to provide 


answers using my examples or other appropriate case studies. 


However, I can make three general observations: 


1) 


Proprietary fictional worlds such as Star Trek and Batman expand 
like houses, through extensions legally authorized and coordinated 
by the IP owners, although the result is more frequently Gaudi than 
Gehry. As I explain in the Batman case study, industrial practices can 
result in a deliberate degree of incoherence and inconsistency.* 
Non-proprietary fictional worlds such as Robin Hood expand like coral 
reefs through the seemingly spontaneous addition of non-authorized 
and uncoordinated accretions produced by non-affiliated individuals 
and corporations. 

Regardless of copyright status, author-centered worlds are almost 
certainly more diverse than those linked by the other two logics, 
given their dependence upon a culturally agreed consensus as to the 
author’s distinctive settings, characters, events, and style. Given the 
complexities of character construction, character-centered worlds 
are probably more diverse than storyworld-centered worlds. In all 


WORLD-BUILDING LOGICS AND COPYRIGHT 117 


three cases however, a proprietary fictional world tends toward more 
coherence and consistency than a non-proprietary fictional world 
governed by the same world-building logic. 


The following section expands upon two of the table’s cells: 2B) the corpo- 
rately-authored, character-centered fictional world of Batman and 4B) the 
PD, character-centered world of Sherlock Holmes. However, for most of his 
127 years, Holmes has occupied cell 1B, which means that the comparison is 
actually between a corporately authored, character-centered world with the 
IP held by successive corporations and an individually-authored, character- 
centered world with the IP held by owners whose relative indifference to 
narrative coherence and consistency and fickle execution of their rights 
led to coral reef-like rather than house-like expansion. 


The Dark Knight and the Great Detective 


Batman first appeared in 1939 in Detective Comics #27, a comic book owned 
by National Publications, which acquired the rights to the character from 
one of its creators, artist Bob Kane (the other, uncredited creator was ghost- 
writer Bill Finger). Today, as a result of the many changes of name and of 
ownership in the intervening decades, DC Comics owns the copyright; it 
has the judicial standing to sue for infringement and can license external 
parties to produce derivative works. Since DC Comics is a subsidiary of 
Time Warner, the parent company can exploit the copyright across the 
multiple media platforms of its various divisions, subsequently acquiring 
the copyright to derivative works such as the feature film series. Time 
Warner has the judicial standing to sue for copyright infringement on 
these derivative works and can license external parties to produce further 
derivative works based upon them, such as the television program Gotham. 
Another division of the Time Warner company, Warner Bros., produces the 
Batman feature films. 

Sherlock Holmes first appeared in 1887 in the novel A Study in Scarlet, 
authored by Arthur Conan Doyle and sold to Beeton’s Christmas Annual. 
Conan Doyle wrote three more Holmes novels and 56 short stories, the final 
one appearing in 1927. Upon Conan Doyle's death in 1930, the IP passed first 
to his older son Denis, then to his younger son Adrian, and finally to his 
daughter Jean. The UK copyright expired 50 years after the author’s death 
in 1980. The US copyright had briefly been acquired by someone outside 
the family, but Dame Jean Conan Doyle, exercising the rights afforded her 


118 WORLD BUILDING 


by US copyright laws, re-acquired them. A year after Dame Jean’s death 
in 1997, with the Conan Doyle Estate (CDE) controlled by nine indirect 
descendants of the author, the US Copyright Term Extension Act of 1998 
extended copyright for individually authored works published prior to 
1 January 1978 by 20 years to a total of 95 years from their publication. As 
a result, the CDE’s copyright in the last of the ten Sherlock Holmes stories 
currently under copyright expires in January 2023. But, as a result of the 
successful complaint against the CDE mentioned at this chapter’s outset, the 
four novels, the remaining 44 short stories, and, thus, the character became 
PD—although technically only 87 per cent of him, since the character 
elements introduced in the few remaining stories still under copyright 
themselves remain under copyright. For example, anyone producing a text 
featuring Watson’s second wife must seek permission from the CDE until 
2023.5 

Conan Doyle himself viewed his immortal creation primarily as a 
money-spinner, believing that his detective was taking his “mind from 
better things’, his “historical dramas and military adventures” (Pittard 2007, 
13). He was thus relatively indifferent to the “fidelity” of Holmes adaptations. 
When American actor-manager William Gillette, who produced the first 
Holmes play, cabled Conan Doyle inquiring “May I marry Holmes?”; Conan 
Doyle cabled back, “You may marry him, murder him, or do anything you 
like to him” (Eyles 1986, 34). The author exercised no active control over 
the screen adaptations produced during his lifetime, such as the 1929 The 
Return of Sherlock Holmes (Basil Dean) in which the lead character (Clive 
Brook) has an “in-name-only resemblance to Holmes” (Barnes 2011, 150). 
His descendants exhibited an even greater desire to exploit the property 
and an even greater indifference to “fidelity” to their father’s work. Co- 
nan Doyle biographer Andrew Lycett says that Denis and Adrian were 
“spendthrift playboys” who viewed their father’s estate as a “milch-cow” 
(Lycett, quoted in Field 2007, 102). Denis agreed that, in making its 1940s film 
series, Universal Films could “adapt and change [the Doyle] stories to the 
fullest extent including the right to use the fullest latitude in changing and 
adapting such stories, their characters, themes and incidents, to translate, 
rearrange, modernize, add to or take from their literary and/or dramatic 
material” (Field 2007, 108). Richard Hewett chronicles the ways in which 
Adrian “imposed exacting requirements” upon the BBC’s 1960s adaptations 
while permitting “the musical Baker Street and the Henry Lester-produced 
film A Study in Terror (1966)” to take “substantial liberties with his father’s 
characters” (Hewett 2015, 200). The CDE has displayed a similar lack of inter- 
est in “fidelity”, licensing adaptations as diverse as the Warner Bros. feature 


WORLD-BUILDING LOGICS AND COPYRIGHT 119 


films; Sherlock Holmes; and Sherlock Holmes: Game of Shadows directed by 
Guy Ritchie; the BBC’s Sherlock; and CBS’s Elementary. 

Throughout Batman’s long history of adaptation to other media, from 
the 1943 film serial and newspaper comic strip to the blockbuster Warner 
Bros. films, the character has been the property of corporations motivated 
to protect his long-term profitability even as they exploit the copyright 
across multiple platforms. Throughout Holmes’ long history of adaptation 
to other media, from the 1899 Gillette play to the blockbuster Warner Bros. 
films, the character has been the property of individuals, including the 
author, whose desire for short-term profitability frequently triumphed any 
yearning toward coherency and consistency in exploiting the copyright 
across multiple platforms. I hypothesize that these differences in copyright 
status account for the dissimilar expansion of the two character’s fictional 
worlds since, when reduced to their essential elements, Batman and Holmes 
appear quite similar. 

I argued above that fictional characters are composed of six components: 
1) psychological traits/habitual behaviours; 2) physical traits/appearance; 
3) speech patterns; 4) biography; 5) interactions with other characters; and 
6) environment. With multiple versions of a character in synchronic and 
diachronic circulation, these components constitute what Ryan refers to 
as a “common frame of reference of diverse documents” that can maintain 
consistency across an expanded fictional world. What is the common 
frame of reference required to construct characters recognizable as Bat- 
man and Sherlock Holmes? 76 years on from his origin, Batman remains a 
character who uses his superb physical abilities (2) and deductive capacities 
(1) to obsessively fight crime (1) in response to the brutal murder of his 
parents when he was a child (4). He operates primarily in Gotham City 
(6), has a recurrent cast of friends, foes, and the police (5) and dresses in 
an iconographically specific costume of cape, cowl, and Bat-logo (2). 127 
years on from his origin, Sherlock Holmes remains a character who uses 
his superb deductive abilities and occasionally his superb physical abilities 
to obsessively solve puzzles in order to stave off boredom (1). He operates 
primarily in large urban centers (usually London, but in one instance New 
York) (5), has a recurrent cast of friends, foes, and the police and, in some 
versions, dresses in an iconographically specific costume of deerstalker 
and Inverness cloak (2).° 

Both characters also have a very minimal frame of reference that 
requires the presence of none of the six textual components. While all 
characters may be said to “escape” their texts by being constituted as 
sentient individuals in readers’ and viewers’ minds, some characters, 


120 WORLD BUILDING 


frequently those at the center of expanded fictional worlds, enact an 
even greater escape by becoming pervasive cultural icons, known to 
those who have never encountered a single text in which they appear. 
In such cases, characters can be identified solely by name; a reference 
to Sherlock Holmes is sufficient to invoke a great detective and one to 
Batman a vigilante crime fighter. Sometimes, visual signifiers alone, or 
what might be termed the character’s iconography, constitute sufficient 
identification; Batman can be reduced to the instantly recognizable Bat 
signal and Holmes to the equally recognizable deerstalker, magnifying 
glass, and pipe. These reduced versions of the characters gesture toward 
the six character components for those who have further knowledge of the 
characters’ fictional worlds, but do not specifically incorporate them. The 
Bat-logo signals Batman and deerstalker, magnifying glass, and pipe signal 
Holmes even to someone whose knowledge derives not from any specific 
textual instantiation but from the characters’ cultural ubiquity. Given the 
minimal nature of their essential components and their further reduc- 
tion to visual signifiers, the two characters have the potential for almost 
infinite mutability. William Uricchio and I have argued that Batman is a 
“floating signifier”; the same is true of Holmes (Pearson and Uricchio 1991). 
Both have floated free of their original creator(s) and original medium 
to migrate across media platforms and around the globe, with resultant 
degrees of divergence and inconsistency in the myriad textual installments 
that collectively comprise their fictional worlds. But Batman’s owners have 
imposed a relatively greater degree of coherence and consistency upon his 
fictional world than Holmes’ owners have imposed upon his. 

For Batman’s first half-century, corporate control ensured that the 
character's multiple incarnations were consecutive and consensual; as 
the character transformed over time new versions replaced the older ver- 
sions. Former DC Comics President and Publisher Paul Levitz traces these 
transformations: the pulp, noir-like original; the child-friendly “lighter in 
tone” Batman of the 1940s and 1950s; the science-fictional Batman of the 
1950s and early 1960s; the 1960s “New Look” Batman of the comics and camp 
Batman of the ABC television series; the emergence of the Dark Knight 
Detective in the 1970s comics; and the definitive version of the Dark Knight 
in Frank Miller’s 1986 graphic novel The Dark Knight Returns (Levitz 2015). 
The first Batman feature film, Tim Burton’s Batman presented this version 
to a larger public. 

In the 1980s, corporate strategy changed from consecutive and con- 
sensual transformation to the concurrent exploitation of multiple and 
divergent Batmen across multiple platforms. Writing in 1990, Uricchio 


WORLD-BUILDING LOGICS AND COPYRIGHT 121 


and I detailed the divergent Batmen co-existing with Burton’s cinematic 
interpretation, from cinematic paratexts such as Prince’s Bat dance 
music video to graphic novels such as Alan Moore’s The Killing Joke, and 
concluded that 


This moment in the last decade of the twentieth century [...] represents 
the most divergent set of refractions of the Batman character’ as ‘newly 
created Batmen, existing simultaneously with the older Batmen of [...] 
the comic reprints and back issues, all struggled for recognition and a 
share of the market (Pearson and Uricchio 1991, 207). 


We speculated that such fragmentation might threaten the character’s 
continued viability—in other words, that his corporate owners had 
adopted a risky strategy by not forging strong narrative links across the 
ever-expanding fictional world. 

Writing several years later, Henry Jenkins offered a different interpreta- 
tion of this crucial moment in the character’s history: “Retrospectively, we 
can see Pearson and Uricchio as describing a moment of transition from 
continuity to multiplicity” (Jenkins 2009). Jenkins defined multiplicity as 
“a shift away from focusing primarily on building up continuity within the 
fictional universe and towards the development of multiple and contra- 
dictory versions of the same characters functioning as it were in parallel 
universes [...]” (Jenkins 2007). Today, multiplicity is the comic industry’s 
prime directive, as the two superpowers, DC and Marvel, frequently reboot 
their universes and re-configure their heroes in their ongoing effort to 
retain old readers and attract new ones as well as to extend their valuable 
IP across multiple platforms. Multiplicity offers consumers new pleasures, 
as Parody points out. 


Re-visionings can be intelligible to franchise consumers as simply facets 
of an overarching entertainment experience, part of rather than in op- 
position to engaging with a beloved property. Shifting between ‘canons’ 
and narrative realities [...] are often a rewarding form of mastery over a 


franchise text, not a source of tension |...].” (Parody 2011, 216). 


Nonetheless, both DC and Warner Bros. police multiplicity through 
pronouncements concerning canonicity and the relationships between 
narrative realities. For example, as the multiple Batmen of 1989 offered 
readers and viewers divergent visions of the character’s past, present, and 
future, Dennis O’Neil, the Batman comics editor, stated: 


122 WORLD BUILDING 


1) By the way, the BATMAN movie (as well as the BATMAN MOVIE 
ADAPTATION), IS NOT a part of Batman continuity [...]. 

2) [...] the tale told in BATMAN: THE KILLING JOKE is NOT the defini- 
tive origin of the Joker. It’s simply one of many POSSIBLE origins [...]. 

3) Since it is set about 20 years in the future, BATMAN: THE DARK 
KNIGHT RETURNS is also NOT considered to be a part of normal 
continuity. Itis a POSSIBLE future for Batman, one which may or may 
not happen. We're NOT saying that it couldn’t happen, but it would be 
ashame to limit the Batman’s future to this one story (O’Neil 1989). 


This disavowal of the Warner Bros. film appears even in the comic book 
adaptation written by O’Neil and published by DC. The initial splash page 
shows astrip of film, bearing key frames drawn from the film, superimposed 
over a cinema audience. In the first dialogue balloon on the page, an audi- 
ence member says “It’s just a movie, for Heaven's sake” (O’Neil 1989). The 
back cover also features a filmstrip design with further scenes from the 
movie. O’Neil said that he intended these film strips to bracket the adapta- 
tion and distinguish it from DC’s continuity (Pearson and Uricchio 1991, 215) 

26 years later, DC personnel continue the attempt to police multiplicity, 
explicitly distinguishing between the large- and small-screen elements of 
their cinematic universe. DC Comics Chief Creative Officer GeoffJohns has 
made it clear that neither Superman nor Batman, currently appearing in 
feature films, will be seen in the television programs, Arrow or The Flash. 
Johns said, “It’s a separate universe than film so that the filmmakers can 
tell the story that’s best for film, while we explore something different in 
a different corner of the DC universe. We will not be integrating the film 
and television universes” (Eisenberg n.d.). Gotham, the television program 
featuring an adolescent Bruce Wayne, which DC licensed the Fox Broadcast- 
ing Company to produce, is also separate from the feature film continuity. 
Kevin Reilly, former chairman of Entertainment for the Fox Broadcasting 
Company, said that, “Warner Brothers manages the entire franchise and 
its one of their top global franchises of all. So there will be an awareness of 
both and we'll have to coordinate when we’re in the market place, but the 
productions are not piggy-backing off one another” (Mac 2014). 

Holmes became synchronically divergent even during Conan Doyle's 
lifetime, with multiple versions of the character in circulation from the 
start of the 20" century. Holmes’ widespread popularity began with the 
publication of Conan Doyle’s short stories in the UK and US editions of 
the Strand Magazine in 1891. These were illustrated by Sidney Paget, who 
based his depiction of Holmes upon his brother Walter. But in 1903, the 


WORLD-BUILDING LOGICS AND COPYRIGHT 123 


Holmes stories began appearing in Collier’s magazine in the US. These were 
illustrated by Frederic Dorr Steele, who based his depiction of Holmes upon 
actor William Gillette, who first appeared in the role in 1899. While the 
Paget illustrations continued to represent Holmes to UK readers, the Steele 
illustrations became the common reference point for American readers. A 
similar multiplicity manifested in cinematic adaptations. Four different 
actors featured in the title role in the Holmes films produced by the Danish 
Nordisk company between 1908 and 191, while, at the same time, German 
and French companies produced films starring yet different actors as the 
Great Detective. 1914 saw the release of both British and American versions 
of A Study in Scarlet, the former starring James Braighton and the latter 
Francis Ford. In the pre-World War I period, the Danish, German, French, 
US, and UK film industries all distributed their products on both sides of 
the Atlantic, making it probable that audiences in these countries and many 
others would have seen Holmes embodied by many different actors of many 
different nationalities in divergent adaptations of Conan Doyle's character. 

Just as early 20" century audiences experienced multiple and divergent 
screen versions of the character, so do early 21 century audiences. The 
2013 Russian television series, set in 1g century London, depicts Holmes 
as a young man in his twenties teamed with a Watson several years older. 
Sherlock updates the character to 21‘ century London and fits him to the 
BBC’s branding strategy of ‘original BBC drama’. Elementary updates the 
character to 21% century New York City, teams him with a female Watson, 
and fits him to CBS’s procedural dramas branding strategy. The Warner 
Bros. feature films transform the Great Detective into an action hero at the 
center of mega-blockbusters. Mr. Holmes, starring Ian McKellan, depicts 
the detective as a 93 year-old suffering from memory loss. These adapta- 
tions selectively emphasize and frequently modify different aspects of the 
character's six constituent elements, while one almost wholly abjures them. 
Elementary strays so far from the urtext that Sherlock producer show-runner 
Stephen Moffat said of it: “They’ve got three big changes: it’s Sherlock Holmes 
in America, it’s Sherlock Holmes updated and it’s Sherlock Holmes with a 
female Watson. I wonder if he’s Sherlock Holmes in any sense other than 
he’s called Sherlock Holmes?” (Jeffery 2012). But, as I argued above, the 
character can indeed be reduced to such a minimal common frame of 
reference that his name alone suffices to ensure recognition; ifa character 
is called Sherlock Holmes then he is Sherlock Holmes. 

Holmes can be young, middle-aged, or old; live in the 19", 20", or 21° 
centuries; reside in London or New York or Sussex; be a recovering drug 
addict, a high functioning sociopath, or afflicted by Alzheimers; and be 


124 WORLD BUILDING 


played by Benedict Cumberbatch or Ian McKellan or Jonny Lee Miller or 
Igor Petrenko or Robert Downey, Jr. But, unlike Batman, no final authority 
polices Holmes’ multiplicity. Those who have read the Conan Doyle canon 
may turn to it, but many have not; moreover, as argued above, the character 
has floated free of his urtext. No single individual or corporation has the 
perceived authority to make conclusive pronouncements concerning ca- 
nonicity or the relationship of one narrative reality to another. However, 
occasionally a specific actor's interpretation may gain a form of canonical 
authority by emerging as the “definitive” Holmes for a generation; Basil 
Rathbone in the 1940s Universal Films, Jeremy Brett in the 1980s and 1990s 
Granada television series, and Benedict Cumberbatch in the 21* century 
BBC television series. 

Such “canonized” versions of the character may subsequently influence 
future adaptors and adaptations. Steven Moffatt and Mark Gattis, his 
Sherlock co-creator, have often spoken of their admiration for previous 
screen Holmes. Said Gattis, “Basil Rathbone was my first and I love those 
films the most and I love the Jeremy Brett series and lots of other versions” 
(Lewis 2014). The astute viewer may well spot in Sherlock as many references 
to previous screen adaptations as to the Conan Doyle canon. The dense 
accretion resulting from more than a century of such intertextuality leads 
Leitch to conclude that “The Holmes adaptations [...] take as their primary 
referent not the particular story they are ostensibly adapting [...] but the 
franchise as a whole” (Leitch 2009, Kindle location 3023). In other words, as I 
have argued, they take as their primary referent not the individual elements 
of the fictional world, but the common frame of reference necessary to 
identify the character that serves to link these various elements together. 


Conclusion 


I have argued that fictional worlds are predicated both upon IP and upon 
world-building logics and used the Batman and Holmes case studies to 
illustrate how copyright accounts for some of the differences between the 
fictional worlds of two quite similar characters. In conclusion, I offer two 
caveats. First, while I have focused here on world-building logics’ intersec- 
tion with copyright, other factors such as country of origin and medium 
specificity can inflect the structure of both proprietary and PD fictional 
worlds. Many of the differences between Sherlock and Elementary can be ac- 
counted for by the context of their respective national broadcasting systems, 
while many of the differences between Gotham and the Batman feature 


WORLD-BUILDING LOGICS AND COPYRIGHT 125 


films can be accounted for by the different aesthetic and industrial practices 
of the two media.’ Second, I began this chapter by speaking of the Holmes 
copyright case as a victory for those who assert that endlessly extended 
and rigorously enforced copyright stifles creativity. However, this doesn’t 
necessarily imply that proprietary worlds offer fewer creative opportunities 
to those who produce them or less satisfaction to those who consume them 
than PD worlds. Those who create Batman can be just as imaginative and 
ingenious as those who produce Holmes. As Johnson says, even “closed and 
proprietary industrial models” entail a “complex and negotiated status of 
creativity [...]” (Johnson 2013, 14). And their audiences certainly derive just 
as much pleasure and enjoyment from the Dark Knight's adventures as they 
do from the Great Detective’s. 


Notes 


1. For arguments against current IP regimes see, for example: Benkler 2006: 
Jenkins, Ford, and Green 2013; Rosenblatt 2015. 

2. Fora fuller explanation of the construction of the televisual character see 

Pearson and Messenger Davies, 2014. 

http://www.dickensworld.co.uk. 

I am indebted to Matthew Freeman's thesis for the House metaphor. 

For more on the Holmes copyright see Rosenblatt and Pearson 2015. 

For more on the construction of the Batman character, see: Pearson and 

Uricchio. For more on the construction of the Holmes character, see: Leitch 

2009 and Polasek 2015. 

7. See: Pearson 2014. 


PAE 


Works Cited 


Andrew, J. Dudley. 1984. Concepts in Film Theory. Oxford: Oxford University Press. 

Barnes, Alan. 2011. Sherlock Holmes on Screen: The Complete Film and TV History. 
London: Titan Books. 

Benkler, Yochai. 2006. The Wealth of Networks: How Social Production Transforms 
Markets and Freedom. New Haven: Yale University Press. 

Chatman, Seymour. 1978. Story and Discourse: Narrative Structure in Fiction and 
Film. Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press. 

Eisenberg, Eric. “Batman V Superman Will Not BE Set In The Same Universe As The 
Arrow and Flash Tv Shows,” CinemaBlend, n.d., http://www.cinemablend.com/ 
new/Batman-v-Superman-Set-Same-Universe-Arrow-Flash-T V-Shows-66363.html 


126 WORLD BUILDING 


Eyles, Allen. 1986. Sherlock Holmes: A Centenary Celebration. New York: Harper 
and Row. 

Field, Amanda J. 2009. England’s Secret Weapon: The wartime films of Sherlock 
Holmes. Hendon: Middlesex University Press. 

Foucault, Michel. 1977. “What is an Author?” In: Language, Counter-Memory, 
Practice: Selected Essays and Interviews, edited by Donald F. Bouchard, Ithaca: 
Cornell, 113-138. 

Freeman, Matthew. 2015. Wizards, Jungles & Men of Steel. University of Nottingham, 
unpublished PhD thesis. 

Hale, Shannon. 2007. Austenland. London: Bloomsbury. 

Hewett, Richard. 2015. “Canon Doyle?: Getting Holmes Right (and Getting the 
Rights) for Television Adaptations,” Adaptations 8:2: 192-206. 

Jeffery, Morgan. 2012. “Steven Moffat on ‘Elementary’: ‘CBS have changed Sherlock 


m 


too much,” Digital Spy, 16 May. http://www.digitalspy.co.uk/ustv/news/a381974/ 
steven-moffat-on-elementary-cbs-have-changed-sherlock-too-much.html. 

Jenkins, Henry. 2007. “Just Men in Capes?,” Confessions of an Aca-Fan, 15 March, 
http://henryjenkins.org/2007/03/just_men_in_capes.html. 

—. 2009. “The Revenge of the Origami Unicorn: Seven Principles of Transmedia 
Storytelling,” Future of Entertainment: Archives, 21 December. http://www. 


convergenceculture.org/weblog/2009/12/the_revenge_of_the_origami_uni.php 


Jenkins, Henry; Ford, Sam; and Green, Joshua. 2013. Spreadable Media: Creating 
Value and Meaning in a Networked Culture. New York: New York University Press. 

Johnson, Derek. 2013. Media Franchising: Creative License and Collaboration in the 
Culture Industries. New York: New York University Press. 

Leitch, Thomas. 2009. Film Adaptation and Its Discontents: From Gone with 
the Wind to The Passion of the Christ. Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University 
Press. 

—. 2008. “Adaptations Without Sources: The Adventures of Robin Hood,” Literature 
Film Quarterly 36.1: 21-30. 

Levitz, Paul. 2015. “Man, Myth and Cultural Icon,” In: Many More Lives of the Bat- 
man, edited by Roberta Pearson, William Uricchio, and Will Brooker. London: 
British Film Institute Publishing: 13-20. 

Lewis, Jaison. 2014. “Steven Moffat is Like My Other Wife,” Mumbai Mirror, 
20 December. http://www.mumbaimirror.com/mumbai/others/Steven-Moffat- 
is-like-my-other-wife/articleshow/45580448.cms. 

Lycett, Andrew. 2007. Conan Doyle: The Man Who Created Sherlock Holmes. London: 
Weidenfield and Nicolson. 

Mac, Danny. 2014. “Fox’s Gotham is NOT connected to the Warner Brothers DC 
Cinematic Universe,” Comic Book Movie, 13 January, http://www.comicbook- 
movie.com/fansites/DannyMac/news/?a=92884. 


WORLD-BUILDING LOGICS AND COPYRIGHT 127 


Mora, Nicholas Medina. 2014. “Estate of ‘Sherlock Holmes’ Author Loses Case 
Seeking To Stop Others’ Use of Character,” 3 November. http://www.buzzfeed. 
com/nicolasmedinamora/you-can-now-legally-publish-your-own-sherlock- 
holmes-stories#.ytwKwoBiijj. 

O’Neil, Dennis. 1989. Batman: The Official Comic Adaptation of the Warner Bros. 
Motion Picture. New York: DC Comics Inc. 

—. 1989. “Batsignals,” Batman #442, n.p. 

Parody, Clare. 2011. “Franchising Adaptation”, Adaptation 4:2: 210-218. 

Pearson, Roberta. 2015. “Sherlock Holmes, a De Facto Franchise?” In: Popular 
Media Cultures: Writing in the Margins and Reading Between the Lines, edited 
by Lincoln Geraghty, London: Palgrave-MacMillan: 186-205. 

—. 2014. “A Case of Identity: Sherlock, Elementary and Their National Broad- 
casting Systems,” In: Storytelling in the Media Convergence Age: Exploring 
Screen Narratives, edited by Roberta Pearson and Anthony N. Smith. London: 
Palgrave-MacMillan:122-150. 

Pearson, Roberta; and Messenger Davies, Maire. 2014. Star Trek and American 
Television. Berkeley: University of California Press. 

Pearson, Roberta; and Uricchio, William. 1991. The Many Lives of Batman, New 
York: Routledge. 

—. 2015. “I’m Not Fooled By That Cheap Disguise.” In: Many More Lives of the Bat- 
man, edited by Roberta Pearson, William Uricchio, and Will Brooker, 205-236. 
London: British Film Institute Publishing. 

Pittard, Christopher. 2007. “VanArsdel Prize Essay ‘Cheap, Healthful Literature’: 
The Strand Magazine, Fictions of Crime, and Purified Reading Communities,” 
Victorian Periodicals Review, 40:1 (Spring): 1-23. 

Polasek, Ashley D. 2015. The Evolution of Sherlock Holmes: Adapting Character Across 
Time and Text, DeMontfort University, unpublished PhD thesis. 

Rosenblatt, Elizabeth L. 2015. “The Adventure of the Shrinking Public Domain,” 
University of Colorado Law Review, v. 86: 562-630. 

Ryan, Marie-Laure. 2004. “Will New Media Produce New Narratives?” In: Narra- 
tives across Media: The Languages of Storytelling, edited by Marie-Laure Ryan, 
227-359. Lincoln: University of Nebraska Press. 

—. 2013. “Transmedia Storytelling and Transfictionality,” Poetics Today 34:3 (Fall): 
362-388. 


Media Cited 


A Study in Scarlet. Directed by George Pearson. 1914. Film. 
A Study in Terror. Directed by James Hill. 1966. London, UK: Freemantle, 2005. DVD. 


128 WORLD BUILDING 


Batman. ABC. 1966-68. TV Series. 

Elementary. CBS. 2012-. TV Series. 

Gotham. FOX. 2014-. Los Gatos, CA: Netflix. Online. 

Sherlock Holmes. Directed by Guy Ritchie. 2009. Burbank, CA: Warner Home Video. 
2010. DVD. 

Sherlock Holmes, a Game of Shadows. Directed by Guy Ritchie. 2011. Burbank, CA: 
Warner Home Video. 2012. DVD. 

Sherlock. BBC. 2010-. TV Series. 


About the author 


Roberta Pearson is Professor of Film and Television Studies at the University 
of Nottingham. Among her most recent publications are the co-authored 
Star Trek and American Television (University of California Press, 2014), the 
co-edited Many More Lives of the Batman (London: BFI, 2015), and Story- 
telling in the Media Convergence Age: Exploring Screen Narratives (London: 
Palgrave-MacMillan, 2015). She is in total the author, co-author, editor, or 
co-editor of thirteen books, and author or co-author of over 80 journal 
articles and book chapters. 


Battleworlds 


The Management of Multiplicity in the Media Industries 


Derek Johnson 


Boni, Marta (ed.), World Building. Transmedia, Fans, Industries. Amster- 
dam University Press, 2017 


DOI: 10.5117/9789089647566/CHO7 


Abstract 

While much attention has been paid to the formal and creative challenges 
of world building in which vast narrative spaces cohere from complex 
textual designs and transmedia relationships, this chapter looks beyond 
the construction of cohesive, branded narrative spaces to consider how 
those spaces, once built, become sites of struggle for stakeholders within 
the media industries. Worlds are not just spaces of narrative elaboration, 
but shared sites in and in relation to which media professionals enter into 
collaborative relationships with one another. In the process of working 
within the established parameters of a shared world, such producers 
engage in a process of position taking, engaging in power plays that assert 
creative authority over the shared realm and making claims to identity, 
distinction, and legitimacy in hierarchical relationships to one another. 
By conceptualizing media worlds in the frame of “world sharing”, we can 
recognize them as significant sites of cultural struggle for media workers 
laboring in precarious, for-hire economies (Caldwell 2008, Deuze 2007, 
Mayer 2011). 


Keywords: World sharing, industry, multiplicity, management, media 
franchising 


In a January 2015 online presentation promoting the newest comic book 
crossover event from Marvel Comics, Senior Vice President of Publishing 


Tom Breevort promised an experience intimately tied to the company’s 
longstanding investment in world building. At stake in the new Secret Wars 
would be the fate of the Marvel Universe itself—poised for destruction 
at worst and reformation at least—as characters, publishers, and readers 


130 WORLD BUILDING 


confronted and resolved the differences between the competing uses, 
interpretations, and iterations of Marvel's intellectual property over the 
past 50 years. Breevort reinforced the idea that the Marvel Universe is 
no single world, but a “multiverse” of parallel worlds in which familiar 
characters and stories shared across each have nevertheless taken dif- 
ferentiable shapes. This “cosmology”, as Breevort put it, includes not just 
the narrative continuity shared across most of the company’s comic books 
since the 1960s, but also all the parallels worlds imagined in the course of 
time-travel storylines, alternative publishing imprints, and adaptations of 
comics in film and television. Through some science-fiction conceit, the 
upcoming Secret Wars hinges on the collision of these once cosmologi- 
cally distinguishable worlds and the notion that not all would survive that 
impact, with shards of different universes competing for existence. From 
this collision, Breevort promised the formation of a new, hybrid narrative 
space called Battleworld: “the detritus left over [...] the melting pot in which 
the new Marvel universe [...] will be fermented.” As Editor-in-Chief Axel 
Alonso added, Battleworld would be “a place where we will be bringing 
new pieces to the board and taking old pieces off.” At the crux of Secret 
Wars, at least as Marvel hyped it, was botha recognition of the multiplicity 
at the core of Marvel’s decades-long world building efforts, and a sense of 
creative and corporate management of those potentialities, both productive 
and destructive. In his own attempt to summarize the presentation, the 
moderator posited: “it’s like Thunderdome: two universes enter, one leaves” 
(Secret 2015). 

This chapter considers how many, if not most, shared media universes 
are in some sense industrially managed “battleworlds”. As shared, collabo- 
ratively authored works that emerge from contemporary media industries’ 
emphasis on branded intellectual property, media worlds have embraced 
the principle of multiplicity (Ford and Jenkins 2009) to smooth over and 
enable creative variation across many markets and wide networks of fran- 
chised production outlets (Johnson 2013). Yet, the inherent multiplicity 
of narrative worlds in the context of media franchising does not mean all 
iterations are equally embraced, supported, or legitimated. Instead, media 
worlds are subject to industrial logics that regulate and authorize some 
potentialities (and not others) as viable, valuable, or virtuous. That process 
admittedly may not be one of open industrial warfare, as a “battleworld” 
might immediately suggest, but it nonetheless constitutes worlds as sites 
of struggle and management among different creative traditions, compet- 
ing stakeholders, and opposing strategies in media industries. In Media 
Franchising, I emphasized “world sharing” over world building in order to 


BATTLEWORLDS 131 


point to the importance of collaboration, multiplicity, and the diversity 
of uses to which worlds might be put in industrial contexts (ibid., 109). 
Here, I push world sharing to the point where we might recognize world 
management— industrial “discourses, dispositions, and tactics” (Johnson, 
Kompare, and Santo 2014) that negotiate divergent uses of worlds and turn 
them to industrial needs. Media worlds are fields for industry battles waged 
through management. 

To conceptualize world management, this chapter will first distinguish 
study of worlds in terms of “building” versus “sharing”. I argue that, while 
world building favors considerations of continuity and authored unity 
in the construction of media texts, a theory of world sharing encourages 
us to think in much more detail about negotiated industrial practices in 
which multiple uses and interests might be situated, opposed, or otherwise 
related. From there, this chapter locates world management both in the 
practices of media institutions and in the circumscribed agency (Havens 
and Lotz 2009) of people within them. Finally, it will consider specific 
strategies of reimagining and rebooting as part of the industrial manage- 
ment of embattled worlds, asking how the multiverse logics unpinning 
many contemporary media franchises reflect a managed multiplicity. 
Altogether, this chapter reveals media franchising as a site of struggle 
and negotiation within the cultural industries, finding that the worlds 
brought into being by franchising engage, resolve, and ultimately manage 
those conflicts and tensions. 


From World Building to World Sharing 


In the context of media franchising, in which narrative worlds constitute 
intellectual properties to be shared widely across different communities of 
production, it is not just the building of worlds, but also the multiplication 
of worlds that is the order of the day. Henry Jenkins’ earliest definitions of 
convergence culture recognized that “storytelling has become the art of 
world building, as artists create compelling environments that cannot be 
fully explored or exhausted within a single work or even a single medium” 
(Jenkins 2006, 116). Later formulations of transmedia storytelling paid 
greater attention to this logic of “multiplicity” at the levels of creativity 
and production (Jenkins 2011; Ford and Jenkins 2009). Beyond single artists 
or centralized authors, creating worlds that could be used multiple times in 
multiple works across multiple mediums, worlds could be used in different, 
often competing ways by multiple industries and multiple creators. 


132 WORLD BUILDING 


World building involves the construction of a text as well as a context 
for its co-creation. While study of world building might focus on fictional 
realms like Westeros (Game of Thrones/A Song of Ice and Fire), the Galactic 
Empire (Star Wars), Middle-earth (The Lord of the Rings), or Panem (The 
Hunger Games), it also prompts us to consider the process of their construc- 
tion by writers, production designers, cinematographers, editors, sound 
designers, participatory audiences, and more. While investigation of world 
building has focused at times on its continuity and the ontological whole- 
ness, sometimes fixating on story and narrative concerns, several scholars 
have nevertheless pointed to the role worlds play as a context for creator and 
audience engagement. Matt Hills invoked the ontological unity of worlds 
in invoking “hyperdiegesis” as a quality of textual construction support- 
ing the engagement of fan communities (Hills 2002, 137-138)—a term he 
revisits in this volume. Mark]J.P. Wolf recognizes worlds as dynamic entities 
that support a multiplicity of authorship he calls “subcreation’”, theorizing 
worlds in terms such as their completeness, capacity for invention, and 
immersiveness to support transauthorial, subcreative elaboration. As Jeffrey 
Sconce argues, the complex architecture and elaborate diegetic depth of 
world building works to calcify narrative formulas in a way that supports 
extensive, successive experimentation with them. Sconce cites Marvel 
Comics as a significant progenitor for forms of “conjectural narrative” in 
television in that depth, familiarity, and continuity of universe allowed 
the development of numerous “What If?” scenarios in which new, slightly 
altered and adapted versions of the Marvel world could cohere (Sconce 
2004). I too have argued that franchised media worlds serve as “engines” 
to drive ongoing elaboration in cultural creation, as a context in which 
future creativity can unfold (Johnson 2013, 141). Overall, these reflections 
on world building recognize the potential for worlds to support a multiplic- 
ity of elaborative interpretation, often suggesting that this multiplicity of 
cultural production be assessed in significant part according to the world’s 
systematic capacity for co-creation. World building is thus an extremely 
useful way to understand the constructs and structures in which shared 
creativity might unfold. 

Nevertheless, a theory of world sharing puts multiplicity of creative 
use—as well as struggles within the industrial context in which worlds 
circulate—more at the center of our concern. Going beyond the world 
as a structure for supporting co-creativity or subcreation, a perspective 
based in world sharing foregrounds everyday negotiation of that structure, 
particularly as embedded in social relationships and shared but unequal 
interests in that world across a multiplicity of different contexts. At question 


BATTLEWORLDS 133 


would not be the unity of the world as a system for creation, but, instead, 
how that multiplicity might be defined by tension, opposition, and a lack of 
unified authority in that creation. As with all things shared, worlds present 
a case of negotiation and potential contestation. This is not to say that 
world sharing would look at co-creative/subcreative cultural production as 
a free-for-all with no sense of hierarchy; indeed, such a perspective would 
properly recognize that the terms of world sharing are strictly tied up in 
differentials of power and authority. As much as textuality and creativity, 
industry becomes central to a study of world sharing to provide context for 
these power relations and the terms by which worlds might be shared and 
subsequently contested. 

World sharing and world building are not conceptually at odds in theoriz- 
ing creativity in contemporary media culture and culture industries. Yet 
the former perspective turns away from questions of how multiplicity is 
supported to think more about how that multiplicity in practice renders 
worlds sites of cultural struggle for creators working in shared institutional 
relations with one another. How, for example, is power over a shared world 
negotiated? Who can exert control over a shared world? How? In what ways 
is shared access and agency in relation to a world differentially determined 
by gender, age, race, class, sexuality, or other identity markers? What role 
does ownership play? How do multiple creators navigate their unequal 
statuses, identities, and agencies? World sharing focuses our attention on 
the social and industrial negotiation of the tensions and oppositions implied 
by a multiplicity of different investments in and uses of the same creative 
context; it directly invokes the potential for cultural struggle by centering 
the incomplete authority and claim of any one party or institutional force 
to its creative possibilities. 


Managed Multiplicity 


As a site of potential tension and struggle, world sharing is carefully man- 
aged by the institutions in which it unfolds, as well as by the individual 
human agents negotiating those institutional contexts. In Making Media 
Work, Derek Kompare, Avi Santo, and I consider management not as the all- 
powerful strategies of executives and other “suits” atop industry hierarchies, 
but as a more productive and dispersed set of “discourses, dispositions, and 
tactics that create meaning, generate value, organize, or otherwise shape 
media work throughout each moment of production and consumption” 
(2014, 2). As discourse, management categorizes and organizes knowledge 


134 WORLD BUILDING 


within the media industries, deployed by workers at the top and bottom of 
industry hierarchies. Dispositions of management emerge through identi- 
ties and self-perceptions that confer authority and justify positions within 
the industry. The tactical nature of management, finally, centers on the 
interpretation, improvisation, and negotiation of agency within the rules 
of institutions, where hegemony is negotiated and enacted. As managed 
in these forms by the media industries, the multiplicity of shared worlds 
becomes a significant site of struggle over authority, position, and the leg- 
ibility of power within the practical, day-to-day operations of franchised 
cultural production. 

At the discursive level, world sharing has been organized, made meaning- 
ful, and rendered valuable through the production of knowledge about 
authority within complex, collaborative, co-creative industry structures. 
Discourses of authorship, for example, play heightened managerial roles 
in imposing sense, order, and legitimacy on heterogeneous uses and 
interpretations of shared worlds. Author figures like Ronald D. Moore, 
executive producer and developer of the reimagined Battlestar Galactica 
television series, legitimize the industrial reuse of franchised properties, 
marking reinterpretation and reimagination of the world as different and 
inspired (Johnson 2013). Matt Hills (2013) has shown these discourses of 
franchise authorship to be a field of struggle, moreover, with those outside 
the privileged position at the center of shared worlds making their own 
claims to authority via “counter-discourses”. Discourses like authorship 
manage which of the multiple uses of the shared world are to be valued, 
which are to be considered suspect, and why. 

The taking of positions in relation to discursively privileged authors 
simultaneously calls our attention to the dispositions that manage shared 
worlds. World sharers lay claim to specific identities, beliefs, and ways of 
experiencing the world in the course of managing positions in relation to 
that world. Considering the case of Zack Snyder (director of 300, Watchmen, 
and Sucker Punch), Suzanne Scott argues that the performance of “fanboy 
auteur” personae models appropriate “correct” orientation to franchise 
co-creation (2013, 442). Snyder and others can deploy their fan identities in 
interviews and other moments of professional persona building to position 
themselves as ideally suited for projects that require recreation ofan existing 
franchise (ibid., 445). Such dispositions allow producers to claim authority 
in the industry (underwritten by, yet in excess of, fan status) while granting 
power and industrial legitimacy to fan identities that are reverential and 
respectful. Examining the heavily branded worlds of television production, 
Denise Mann (2009) stresses how show-runners increasingly perform the 


BATTLEWORLDS 135 


role of brand managers, talking to the press and otherwise building hype 
for a series (not just writing and producing). Professional authority, in this 
case, depends on getting out in front of the camera and demonstrating 
one’s organization, vision, overall creative disposition, and business acu- 
men to coordinate production across television, online platforms, video 
games, and more. The management of world sharing is thus conducted at 
the level of professional identity and the performance of creative personae 
that reinforce authorial discourses and justify political economic lines 
of industrial authority. Disposition shores up the multiple, differential 
industrial positions from which worlds are shared. 

The multiplicity of world sharing is lastly managed on a tactical front 
in which producers, executives, and other participants in the industrial 
process of creativity exert circumscribed agency. As examined by both 
MJ. Clarke and Trevor Elkington, the process of “double approval” might be 
productively considered as something managed through tactical maneuvers 
within media industries (Clarke 2013, Elkington 2009). To produce comic 
books, novels, and video games based on television series, outside publishers 
most often acquire licenses from television studios, effectively purchasing 
the right to share the related world. Publishers then contract the creative 
labor of doing so to for-hire writers and/or production studios. Creators 
must thus obtain approval for their labor on two levels: they must please 
the publisher while, at the same time, hoping that the publisher will be able 
to obtain subsequent approval for the work from the studio. The conditions 
of corporate ownership over copyrighted worlds are first managed in this 
instance by contractual practices that prescribe the relationships between 
studio licensor and publisher licensee, as well as quotidian communication 
and working relationships between executives in each office (or the lack 
thereof between licensor and for-hire creator, where lack of direct interac- 
tion maintains power imbalances). Second, at the level of production and 
creative practice, individual world sharers refine techniques to negotiate 
these constraints while still developing their own creative interests in the 
shared world. Practices such as “continuity mining” allow producers to share 
in co-creation of a franchised world in ways more likely to win approval, 
framing attempts at invention in relation to territory and themes already 
well explored. 

Altogether, this framework of discourse, disposition, and tactic helps us 
conceptualize the dynamics of world sharing not just as defined by negotia- 
tion of tensions within industrial relationships, but also more specifically as 
a managed multiplicity that shapes and sets limits on the collaboration and 
co-creation that world sharing might support. Managed multiplicity reveals, 


136 WORLD BUILDING 


in part, a form of power that produces meaning, organization, identity, and 
practice within the broader set of creative possibilities enabled by the world. 


Managing Battleworlds 


This understanding of world sharing as managed multiplicity in an indus- 
trial context need not exclude concerns for media texts, however. Instead, 
we can consider how dominant creative practices and textual qualities 
serve managerial functions within industry strategies. 

As worlds are shared among numerous production communities and 
contexts of production within the logics of media franchising, they are 
inevitably multiplied. The 21“ century “reimagining” of Battlestar Galactica 
in a form disconnected from the continuity of the original 1978 series, 
for example, nevertheless involves some use of a shared narrative world, 
as key characters, events, and settings remain to be reinterpreted in an 
alternative, updated manner. The push toward a Battlestar multiverse, as 
opposed to maintaining a unified, continuous world, came from a number 
of factors, including industry desires to reach a different audience with 
edgier programming and needs for professional, creative, and network 
distinctions. Yet, as the mobilization of a franchise brand, full separation of 
one Battlestar world from the other would has proven counterproductive. 
While the decision to recast the Starbuck character as female aimed in part 
to subvert audience expectations (Kungl 2008), other plot points along the 
way, such as the second season arrival of Admiral Cain and the Battlestar 
Pegasus, reinforced the persistent connections between the two Battlestar 
worlds. Arunning theme throughout the series suggested that the characters 
all played familiar roles in an eternal cycle of repeated action, punctuated 
by eerie, repeated dialogue such as “all this has happened before, and will 
happen again”. These elements managed the multiplicity of world sharing 
by imposing specific relationships between the two television series that 
shared that world, differentiating them at some times and drawing them 
closer together at others. 

Now that comic book films and other Hollywood blockbuster have grown 
increasingly invested in world-building strategies long utilized by comics, 
television and other serialized media, we can see similar tactics managing 
the multiplied use of shared worlds in the cinema. Hollywood’s embrace 
of media franchising as a strategic logic drives it toward repetition of the 
familiar—if not to avoid innovation entirely, to couch innovation in safe, 
risk-averse frameworks already proven to be marketable. Paradoxically, 


BATTLEWORLDS 137 


media franchising demands that Hollywood produce more of the same 
while always finding new ways to differentiate that product; Spider-Man 
must lead to more Spider-Man, but each film must push, in some way, into 
unfamiliar territory to distinguish itself from previous entries. The film 
franchise “reboot” manages this strategic challenge; Spider-Man can be 
occasionally reset to zero to allow both new interpretations and restatement 
of the familiar. Moreover, as announced in 2015, the reboot practice can be 
used to move the Spider-Man character from a narrative world produced 
across multiple films by one studio (Sony) and transplant a new version of 
him into another ongoing world controlled by a different studio (Marvel) 
(Sony Pictures 2015). 

The managed reboot, like the reimagination, is thus a tactic that allows 
for careful articulation of the relationship between shared, industrially 
iterative worlds. While reboots work by launching a new, alternate world 
within the overall shared universe, Hollywood producers have increasingly 
embraced “soft” reboots in which they try to have their cake and eat it 
too—doing something radically different to produce a new version of a 
world, while positing persistent value and relationship in relation to an old 
version. While the 2009 Star Trek introduced filmgoers to a reimagined, 
younger version of the Enterprise crew, it framed that new interpretation 
within a convoluted time travel/alternate reality premise initiated in the 
shared continuity in which all prior Star Trek productions had been situated. 
The villain Nero goes back in time from a point in the original Star Trek 
timeline, changes history, and enables the new film franchise to offer a 
new take on the world as history unfolds in a new way. At age 77, Leonard 
Nimoy reprised his role as Spock from the original timeline, effectively 
passing the torch to the characters inhabiting this new iteration of the 
world. Managing two iterations of a world by holding them in tension, the 
film works quite cleverly on an industrial level both to forge ahead with an 
appeal to the younger audiences courted by Hollywood, and to maintain 
some service to longtime fans. 

X-Men: Days of Future Past uses a similar time travel and soft reboot 
tactic to manage the multiplicity of shared worlds in the context of media 
franchising. By this seventh film in 20" Century Fox’s X-Men franchise, 
filmmakers had exhausted many of the most popular characters and events 
from the comic book world, having killed top tier characters like Jean Grey 
and Cyclops and already adapted storylines like The Dark Phoenix Saga. 
The participation of many different filmmakers with different visions for 
the characters also muddled a sense of shared continuity within the world. 
While a reboot would have allowed Fox flexibility to draw from that material 


138 WORLD BUILDING 


anew and stave off potential creative or commercial stagnation, such a 
prospect would carry its own risks. Actors like Hugh Jackman still proved 
commercially marketable in the role of Wolverine, and the films overall 
continued to perform well at the box office. At the same time, competition 
between Fox and Marvel Studios (extending from historical licensing agree- 
ments that excluded X-Men from the unified “Marvel Cinematic Universe” 
developed by the latter) would have given a reboot added significance; 
such a move could be read as failure and inferior ability on Fox’s part, 
compared to the celebrated and tightly coordinated long-term continuity 
under construction by Marvel in its films. The soft, managed reboot of 
Days of Future Past, therefore, turned on its own time-travel narrative in 
order to introduce changes to the world in its past, culminating in a coda 
in which Jean Grey and Cyclops now live in the future, having experienced 
a completely different set of (now untold) events that did not lead to their 
demise. Future X-Men films are now free to go back to that new, unwritten 
past, with 2016’s Age of Apocalypse recasting younger versions of Jean Grey 
and Cyclops; but that new interpretation is framed as part and parcel of a 
multiverse persistently shared with the original films. While the production 
of the series has been marked by multiplicity, disjuncture, and divergence 
on many levels, this plot device manages that complex, uneven industry 
framework by imposing a new narrative unity. 

The 2015 film Terminator: Genisys too employs narrative time travel to 
situate new industry adaptation within the shared world of the original 
films—just as the 2008 television series Terminator: The Sarah Connor 
Chronicles did. As a narrative trope and tool of world sharing, time travel is 
a tactic that allows managed reboots to pass the torch from one generation 
to the next: the shared relationship between two worlds can be clearly 
organized in relationship to industry goals, audience targeting strategies. 
Potential tensions and oppositions between worlds in the same franchise 
universe are managed by framing within the text as well as the legacies, 
hierarchies, and relationships among them. 

Returning to comics, Marvel’s Secret Wars crossover, and its invocation of 
a Battleworld, we see this same time travel/alternate worlds trope smooth 
over tensions and resolve the “battle” of world sharing in a way that serves 
a variety of industry interests. The “battleworld” of world sharing, strictly 
speaking, might be more accurately understood as the institutional contexts 
in which worlds are shared than the narrative universe that unfolds as 
creative managers put some pieces in new positions and take others off 
the table. In this case, we might be able to locate management not just in 
tactical forms of narrative construction, but also discursive and dispositional 


BATTLEWORLDS 139 


practices surrounding that process. In promising that all its parallel worlds 
were about to collide in a violent, oppositional way, Marvel’s promotional 
rhetoric turned on a discourse of collective authorship and coordination 
to impose a sense of institutional order upon that collision, to some degree 
downplaying or even disavowing the multiplicity that produced so many 
different iterative worlds in the first place. Despite drawing on the wide use 
of Marvel properties across markets and histories, Axel Alonso explains, 
in the Secret Wars announcement video, that the story would be “the most 
coordinated event we’ve ever done. As everyone knows, we're a big, big 
universe, a shared universe, and we've done a few events over the years. Every 
time we were planning an event--through AXIS, Original Sin, A vs. X-- [...] 
we've had to make decisions based on the fact that we knew Secret Wars was 
headed our way” (Secret 2015). The narrative battle between these worlds, 
he promises, does not represent any corporate opposition or contestation. 
Instead, it is positioned as a singular, almost inevitable outcome pursued by 
the various editors, writers, and artists working on other big events in recent 
years. Lest all that collective work suggest a potential for disunity, Alonso 
offers the figure of Secret Wars writer Jonathan Hickman to bring cohesion 
to this industrial world sharing, promising that his vision in the core mini- 
series event would shape the stories told in crossover titles written by other 
writers. The multiplicity of industrial creativity invoked by the collision of 
worlds is thus managed by discourses that reaffirm coordination and unity. 

The Secret Wars video presentation also provides, on a corporate level, 
an opportunity for Marvel's publishing division to articulate its value and 
position in relation to a shared media world. Unsurprisingly, given that the 
event served to hype the creative output of Marvel’s publishing division, 
Alonso and Breevort emphasize the centrality of the comic book industry to 
the multiplication of Marvel worlds across a wide range of media channels. 
While celebrating the savvy of Kevin Feige and other producers building the 
far more popular and commercially lucrative “Marvel Cinematic Universe’, 
Alonso and Breevort nonetheless take care to emphasize that “it all started 
on the comic book page” (Secret 2015). While many might assume that 
Secret Wars would remake the Marvel Universe in the image of the Marvel 
Cinematic Universe to take advantage of the greater cross-promotional 
opportunities offered to the former by the latter, the publishing division 
positions itself contrarily in this moment as arbiter over the whole of Mar- 
vel’s creative output across any and all media, with the moral authority to 
determine what preceding material was worthy of inclusion in a new Marvel 
universe and which other “pieces” should be taken off the board. Of course, 
Marvel publishing is in no position to wipe away the Marvel Cinematic 


140 WORLD BUILDING 


Universe, but, in positioning itself as having life-and-death powers over the 
future of worlds created at many different points in time and across different 
industries, the publishing division claims authority over a much bigger, more 
complex industry formation. With the 1992 animated X-Men television series 
highlighted as one of the worlds at stake in Secret Wars (Lovett 2014), Marvel 
publishers claim a position of authority even over parallel worlds developed 
outside of the direct purview of the comics division. Marvel publishing was 
the alpha from which they all sprang, and the omega that could bring them 
to a final end. Even if, or perhaps especially because, that same political 
economic industry power does not exist, Secret Wars gave Marvel publishing 
an opportunity to construct a corporate disposition to legitimize its moral 
authority over worlds now shared widely in the media industries. 


Conclusion 


The Battleworld conceit of Secret Wars is only one instance in which the 
shared worlds of media franchising are held in tension within the narrative 
itself. Alternate universes, and their convergence with one another, are by 
no means new to comic books, having served companies like Marvel for dec- 
ades. Secret Wars is not fundamentally different in the respects examined 
here from Crisis on Infinite Earths, Final Crisis, Convergence or many other 
DC Comics events that have provided that competing publisher with an 
opportunity to make violent changes to a shared world in narratively justi- 
fied ways. Indeed, we are now ina moment in which the alternate universe 
“what if?” strategies long embraced by comic books and television have 
become a central part of the cinema as well, with the time-travel-incursion 
plot becoming a dominant device for Hollywood studios seeking to iterate 
worlds anew while keeping them situated within a shared continuity and 
serialized narrative framework. At a narrative level, media franchising is 
producing meta-commentary about world sharing. 

Taking stock of such examples, this chapter has argued that the jux- 
taposition of worlds we see here works in part to manage conflicts and 
tensions within the media industries. The “battleworld” of media franchis- 
ing, in which producers and institutions with different outlooks, goals, 
and strategies nevertheless all draw on the same creative resources, make 
world sharing a contested and above all managed multiplicity, in terms of 
both narrative and practice. Shared worlds are battleworlds to the extent 
that they require negotiation and management of their shared status by the 
multiple producers and industries that exploit them. By thinking about the 


BATTLEWORLDS 141 


sharing of worlds, not just their building, we recognize the tensions inherent 
in that practice and the management required to impose order, meaning, 
and authority on that contested process. Appropriately enough, those strug- 
gles may be “secret wars”, with the discourses, dispositions, and tactics 
deployed to manage multiplicity obscuring the existence of industrial and 
creative struggles as much as calling our attention to them—particularly 
in the case of alternate universe time travel reboots that neatly rewrite the 
narrative past. Yet, by focusing on how multiplicity is managed, we can 
better understand media franchising and world sharing as the realms of 
contestation that they are. 


Works Cited 


Anonymous. 2015. “Secret Wars Kickoff Press Conference.” Marvel.com, January 22, 
http://marvel.com/videos/watch/4926/secret_wars_kickoff_press_conference. 


—. 2015. “Sony Pictures Entertainment Brings Marvel Studios into the Amaz- 
ing World of Spider-Man.” Marvel.com, February 9, http://marvel.com/news/ 


movies/24062/sony_pictures_entertainment_brings_marvel_studios_into_the 


amazing _world_of_spider-man. 

Clarke, Michael J. 2012. Transmedia Television: New Trends in Network Serial Produc- 
tion, New York: Bloomsbury. 

Elkington, Trevor. 2009. “Too Many Cooks: Media Convergence and Self-Defeating 
Adaptations.” In: The Video Game Theory Reader 2, edited by Bernard Perron 
and Mark J.P. Wolf, 213-235. New York: Routledge. 

Ford, Sam; and Jenkins, Henry. 2009. “Managing Multiplicity in Super Hero Comics: 
An Interview with Henry Jenkins.” In: Third Person: Authoring and Explor- 
ing Vast Narratives, edited by Pat Harrigan and Noah Wardrp-Fruin, 303-311. 
Cambridge: MIT Press. 

Havens, Tim and Lotz, Amanda. 2009. Understanding Media Industries. Oxford: 
Oxford UP. 

Hills, Matt. 2002. Fan Cultures. London: Routledge. 

—. 2013. “From Chris Chibnall to Fox: Torchwood’s Marginalized Authors and 
Counter-Discourses of TV Authorship.” In: A Companion to Media Authorship, 
edited by Jonathan Gray and Derek Johnson, 200-220. Malden: Wiley Blackwell. 

Jenkins, Henry. 2006. Convergence Culture: When Old and New Media Collide. New 
York: NY UP. 

—. 2011. “Transmedia 202: Further Reflections.” In: Confessions ofan Aca-Fan: The 
Official Weblog of Henry Jenkins, August 1. http://henryjenkins.org/2011/08/ 
defining_transmedia_further_re.html. 


142 WORLD BUILDING 


Johnson, Derek. 2013. Media Franchising: Creative License and Collaboration in the 
Culture Industries. New York: NY UP. 

Johnson, Derek; Kompare, Derek; and Santo, Avi (eds.). 2014. Making Media Work: 
Cultures of Management in the Entertainment Industries. New York: NY UP. 
Kungl, Carla. 2008. “Long Live Stardoe!’ Cana Female Starbuck Survive?” In: Cylons 
inAmerica: Critical Studies in Battlestar Galactica, edited by Tiffany Potter and 

C. W. Marshall, 98-117. New York: Continuum. 

Lovett, Jamie. 2014. “Breaking Down Marvel’s Secret Wars: X-Men ’g2.” Comic Book. 
com, November 28, http://comicbook.com/2014/11/29/breaking-down-marvels- 
secret-wars-x-men-92/. 

Mann, Denise. 2009. “It’s Not TV, It’s Brand Management TV: The Collective 
Author(s) of the Lost Franchise.” In: Production Studies: Cultural Studies of the 
Media Industries, edited by Vicki Mayer, Miranda Banks, and John T. Caldwell, 
99-114. New York: Routledge. 

Sconce, Jeffrey. 2004. “What If? Charting Television’s New Textual Boundaries.” 
In: Television After TV: Essays on a Medium in Transition, edited by Lynn Spigel 
and Jan Olsson, 93-112. Durham: Duke UP. 

Scott, Suzanne. 2013. “Dawn of the Undead Author: Fanboy Auteurism and Zack 
Snyder.” In: A Companion to Media Authorship, edited by Jonathan Gray and 
Derek Johnson, 440-462. Malden: Wiley Blackwell. 

Wolf, MarkJ.P. 2012. Building Imaginary Worlds: The Theory and History of Subcrea- 
tion. New York: Routledge. 


About the author 


Derek Johnson is Associate Professor of Media and Cultural Studies in 
the Department of Communication Arts at the University of Wisconsin- 
Madison. He is the author of Media Franchising: Creative License and Col- 
laboration in the Culture Industries (NYU Press, 2013). He has also co-edited 
A Companion to Media Authorship (Wiley-Blackwell, 2013) and Making 
Media Work: Cultures of Management in the Entertainment Industries (NYU 
Press, 2014). 


8. Platform Producer Meets Game Master 
On the Conditions for the Media Mix 


Marc Steinberg 


Boni, Marta (ed.), World Building. Transmedia, Fans, Industries. Amster- 
dam University Press, 2017 


DOI: 10.5117/9789089647566/CHo8 


Abstract 

This chapter examines the necessary conditions for the creation ofa trans- 
media franchise. Despite transmedia storytelling manuals’ optimistic 
repetition of the refrain that allyou need is your imagination, transmedia 
development requires specific, often precise conditions to occur. This 
chapter focuses on two of these necessary conditions in particular: condi- 
tions or media a priori that have been essential to the development of 
the Japanese media mix from the 1980s onwards. Exploring Kadokawa 
Tsuguhiko and his associates’ creation of transmedia worlds within the 
Japanese publisher Kadokawa Books during the 1980s and 1990s, this 
chapter suggests that one of these a priori is the development of maga- 
zines. A second, strategic or conceptual a priori for the media mix during 
the 1980s is the development of the figure of the creator as game master 
or producer—something that closely resembles what in Hollywood has 
more recently be called the transmedia producer. In focusing on these 
two developments and their industry context in the Japan of the 1980s and 
1990s, we arrive at the two the necessary conditions for the contemporary 


form of the media mix and its creation of transmedia worlds. 


Keywords: Media mix; Platform producer; Transmedia in Japan; Ka- 
dokawa Books; Otsuka Eiji 


What are the necessary conditions for transmedia development? What are 
the medial conditions that support the creation and prolonging of story- 
worlds? Transmedia storytelling manuals often repeat what they present as 
a truism: that anyone with an active imagination can create a storyworld. 
Yet, the conditions under which storyworlds are developed into transmedia 


144 WORLD BUILDING 


or media mix franchises, and are capitalized on as such, are quite specific 
(for the sake of economy, we may consider what in Japan is called media mix 
as roughly equivalent to the North American term, transmedia storytelling, 
with the significant caveat that the media mix is not tied to stories, as 
it is often developed around characters). This article sets out to explore 
the media a priori for the creation of transmedia worlds through a close 
examination of a specific case study: Kadokawa Tsuguhiko and his associ- 
ates’ activities within a section of Japanese publisher Kadokawa Books 
during the 1980s and 1990s. 

The media a priori for the media mix is, it turns out, the development 
of magazines. A second strategic or conceptual a priori for the media 
mix during the 1980s is the development of the figure of the creator as 
game master or producer—something that closely resembles what in 
Hollywood has more recently be called the transmedia producer.’ The 
intersection of media or platform producer and game master reshaped 
the media mix in 1980s Japan and set the stage for Kadokawa’s metamor- 
phosis from a publisher that had taken to releasing films in the 1970s, to a 
company known for its distribution model of the media mix that crosses 
multiple platforms, develops tie-ins with book stores and video streaming 
platforms, and whose activities characterize much of transmedia today. 
This is the case even as the role played by magazines is supplemented by 
technological media platforms like e-readers and streaming sites—most 
notably Niconico Video, one of the most prominent streaming platforms 
in Japan.’ 

Kadokawa Books is still on the frontlines of these transformations. Hav- 
ing merged in 2014 with Niconico’s parent company Dwango, and become 
first KADOKAWA-Dwango and subsequently renaming itself KADOKAWA 
(of which Kadokawa Books is now a subsidiary), it is at the forefront of 
experiments in platform production and media-mix creation. An examina- 
tion of the earlier moment of magazine creation as platform production 
offers a vantage point from which to rethink the importance of media 
platforms to the media mix, as well as to understand the specific history 
of the media mix in Japan. The framing of the medium of the magazine as 
itself a platform is a recent rereading of media history by none other than 
Kadokawa Tsuguhiko himself, who situates magazines and bookstores as 
earlier incarnations of the digital entities such as iTunes Store and Google 
Play and YouTube that we call platforms today. In this broader reading of 
the term, Kadokawa Tsuguhiko recently defined the platform quite simply 
as “the place where money and people and commodities meet” (Kadokawa 


2013, 37). 


PLATFORM PRODUCER MEETS GAME MASTER 145 


This broader conception of the platform is part of a reconceptualization 
of the term within management studies (Eisenmann, Parker, and Van 
Alstyne 2006), that also finds its way into Google executives Eric Schmidt 
and Jonathan Rosenberg’s definition of the term in their How Google 
Works: “A platform is, fundamentally, a set of products and services that 
bring together groups of users and providers to form multisided markets.” 
(Schmidt and Rosenberg 2014, 78-79). That is to say, there is something 
useful about the rereading of media history in terms of the construction 
of platforms, as sites where money and people and commodities meet, as 
a bazaar of sorts that allows for certain activities to take place. Ifthe first 
aim of this essay is to inquire into the medial conditions for transmedia 
development, the second main objective is to retell the history of trans- 
media from the perspective of platform building, with the understanding 
that platforms need not be digital. As Ian Condry puts it most succinctly, 
“one can think of platforms not only as mechanical or digital structures of 
conveyance but also as ways to define and organize our cultural worlds” 
(Condry 2013, 58). 

If the media mix and its history has particular import to the rethinking 
of the conditions of transmedia in general, it is due, in part, to the central 
place it occupies in Henry Jenkins’ development of transmedia storytelling 
as theory, within Convergence Culture (Jenkins 2006), and in part to the 
intensity and variety of manners in which media mixes unfold in Japan. 
It would be an exaggeration to credit Kadokawa with the development of 
media mix completely; as I argue elsewhere, there are earlier examples 
of media mix that stretch back to the 1930s, 1950s, and, particularly, with 
the start of television animation, to the 1960s (Steinberg 2012). Neverthe- 
less, Kadokawa Books has played a key role in the current development 
of transmedia in Japan and is therefore also a company that we must 
credit with the development of the conditions for the model of transmedia 
storytelling that the Wachowskis found in Japan. The Wachowskis later 
used this model in The Matrix and this model served as the fundamental 
axis for Jenkins’ own theorization of the phenomenon. The third objective 
of this essay, then, will be to offer a more in-depth portrait of a particular 
era of the development of the media mix within Japan, painting a clearer 
picture of the development of the Tsuguhiko-style media mix than I was 
able to do in Anime’s Media Mix, and doing so in part through the lens of 
the development of “new media’ in the 1980s.*I should also note that this 
re-examination of the 1980s as a new media era is inspired by scholarship 
on the transformation of the television into monitor during that period 
and the work of Thomas Lamarre and Sheila Murphy in particular. The 


146 WORLD BUILDING 


proliferation of media around the television set—notably, computer 
games and videotapes—transforms the media milieu in which televi- 
sion is situated. The new media of the 1980s offered new possibilities for 
unfolding media mixes, possibilities that were aggressively explored within 
Kadokawa Books. 

Before continuing, a brief overview of Kadokawa Books is in order. 
Kadokawa Tsuguhiko’s father, Kadokawa Gen’yoshi, founded the pub- 
lishing house in 1945 and dedicated it to the publication of highbrow 
literary classics and haiku. Upon Gen’yoshi’s passing in 1975, he turned 
the reins over to Tsuguhiko’s elder brother, Kadokawa Haruki. Haruki 
and Tsuguhiko together took the company down the path of media-mix 
production, albeit with somewhat different techniques, target audiences, 
and attitudes towards transmedia expansion. Elsewhere, I’ve noted the 
sordid family history and the sibling rivalry between the two brothers 
(Steinberg 2012); for now, let it suffice to note that both brothers’ work 
was essential to the transformation of Kadokawa into a media mix pow- 
erhouse. Schematically, Haruki developed what he called the Holy Trinity 
model of media synergy, characterized by blockbuster or large-scale film 
production for mass consumption, combined with the re-release of novels 
and soundtracks. The advertising blitz promoted all three elements of this 
Trinity at once—film-novel-soundtrack.® Tsuguhiko, by contrast, opted 
for a smaller scale media-mix practice that relies on the fantasy turn in 
the 1980s, drawing on and learning from the popularity of role-playing 
games like Dungeons and Dragons (which provided those at Kadokawa 
with an important source of training for transmedia world building), and 
connects with the increasing centrality of video games to popular culture, 
and the media mix in particular (Picard and Pelletier-Gagnon 2015). A 
major rift between the brothers would developed around 1992-1993, 
leading Tsuguhiko to quit the company and start his own. Months later, 
after Haruki was arrested on drug-trafficking charges in 1993, Tsuguhiko 
returned to take the reins of the company and henceforth treated the 
company as his own. 

In what follows, I shall briefly trace the emergence of this latter model 
of the media mix, which has since become the backbone of one strand 
of transmedia practice in Japan—namely, smaller-scale productions 
that aim for smaller-scale successes among their slightly older target 
audience.® With its deep connection to “new media” of the 1980s such 
as the VHS and the Famikon (or Nintendo Entertainment System, as 
it is known in North America), the Tsuguhiko media mix is the bridge 
between analog and digital transmedia developments. As such, it offers 


PLATFORM PRODUCER MEETS GAME MASTER 147 


a glimpse into the way responses to technological and social changes 
that first became apparent during the 1980s inform the reformations of 
the media mix with the rise of digital media in the 2000s.’ Simply put: 
to unravel the media a priori of transmedia storytelling and to build 
a bridge between media-mix practice and the increasing mediation of 
cultural content via digital streaming platforms such as Niconico Video, 
it behooves us to examine some key developments that took place in the 
1980s within Kadokawa Books. 


“New Media” and the Magazine Media Mix 


Reading through Kadokawa annual internal company reports, one thing 
becomes strikingly clear: Kadokawa Tsuguhiko was intrigued from very 
early on by the commercial potential of new technologies. He often 
discusses what in the 1980s was (already) being called “new media” (nyu 
media) in speeches and essays prepared for these reports, which were 
distributed at annual company gatherings of employees and business 
partners, and ostensibly describe the directions the company was tak- 
ing. As early as 1984, he discusses the potential for electronic books—a 
format that would only come to fruition in the 2000s and that only became 
commercially viable towards the end of that decade (Kadokawa 1984, 4). 
This interest was, by no means, simply a personal hobby; it was closely 
tied to his managerial vision for the company. As he summarizes in 1984: 
“New media is new business.” This embrace of new media as new busi- 
ness persisted throughout Kadokawa Tsuguhiko’s career and eventually 
resulted in the production of an e-book platform, BookWalker, meant to 
rival Amazon’s Kindle.® 

But the “new media” that most interested Tsuguhiko in the early 
1980s was the television set, or rather, the TV set as it was undergoing its 
transformation into video monitor by the emergence of the VCR and video 
game consoles. Consequently, after a long process of incubation, Kadokawa 
Tsuguhiko founded the weekly magazine Za Terebijon (The Television), with 
the first issue appearing in September 1982. 

Here it is worth quoting Kadokawa’s explanation for the founding of 
Kadokawa Shoten’s first-ever weekly magazine: 


It is said that television has entered its third revolution. First the black- 
and-white television, second the color television. From now, in its third 
age, it will become possible to use the television set for TV newspapers 


148 WORLD BUILDING 


ax, BHTKH 


FLL MERA 


7A Ea 
= 10. 


t 
p 
ly 
fi 
: 
a 
m 
is 


8.1: Cover of the first issue of Za Television 


and for TV calling, and, before this, fiber-optical transmission will expo- 
nentially expand the number of channels. As a result of these changes, 
the TV will shift from what is now an entertainment-centric medium to 
a more individualized information transmission tool. In the midst of this 
diversification of media in the near future, The Television is certain to 
become the most important and central magazine. (Kadokawa 1982, 7) 


PLATFORM PRODUCER MEETS GAME MASTER 149 


As Kadokawa Tsuguhiko predicts, reflecting existing popular rhetoric about 
the future of television, television was no longer just a stand-alone medium, 
but was increasingly becoming part of new media, something closer to a 
computer than a mere television, and an interface to a wider media world. 
As Kadokawa recalls, “I thought that around the television set anew market 
was starting, and new possibilities would be opening.” 

The impact of this foundation of The Television on Kadokawa Shoten’s 
history is hard to overstate. In company charts and documents (themselves 
symptomatic of attempts to narrate and re-narrate company history), 
1982 is consistently listed as a key year for Kadokawa: the beginning of the 
“Magazine Era”. In fact, Tsuguhiko had wanted to start a television magazine 
since the early 1970s. During a visit to the US in 1970, he was thoroughly 
impressed with the American magazine TV Guide (Sato, 80-81), but, when 
he raised the idea with his Kadokawa associates, they thought it would be 
impossible to gain the kind of scale needed for such a magazine to suc- 
ceed. Ten years later, in 1982, he finally founded The Television. Tsuguhiko 
envisioned this as more than simply an information magazine listing the 
TV schedule; it was meant to be a magazine that engaged the culture and 
technology around the TV set.” This included the culture of the stars who 
appeared in TV shows, but more important still, it focused on the new 
technological developments around the TV set: the video cassette recorder 
and the TV-based video-game system.” 

The VCR and the video-game system were hardware attachments to the 
TV set that would transform the television from a reception device for on-air 
programming to a platform that could accommodate recorded programs 
played back at a later date, also known as “time-shifting”. It also gave rise 
to an entirely new market for video cassettes, as well as new models of 
distribution and aesthetics of both film and animation—straight-to-video 
film and animation programs (V-cinema and OVA). This was also the first 
step towards thinking of the TV set as a platform for entertainment." The next 
step would be to build magazine platforms around The Television. 


Magazines as Platforms: The Television, Comptiq, New Type, and 
Marukatsu Famikon 


The Television was a first experiment in an attempt to capture the increas- 
ingly complex media environment that was unfolding in the early 1980s. It 
was also the place from which two of Kadokawa’s most important magazines 
for the media mix would emerge: Comptiq and New Type. 


150 WORLD BUILDING 


Comptig started as an extra edition of The Television, its first issue hitting 
newsstands in November 1983. The genesis of Comptiq started with Ka- 
dokawa Tsuguhiko suggesting to Sato Tatsuo (later president of Kadokawa, 
but still a freelance editor at the time) that he develop a game magazine 
for the growing PC game market. His reasoning was that, if there could 
be a magazine for media around the television set, there could also be a 
magazine around the personal computer.’* Mimicking The Television tagline, 
“A Book for Having Fun with the TV” (Terebi to asobu hon), the tagline for 
early issues of Comptiq was: “A Book for Having Fun with the PC” (Pasokon 
to asobu hon). 

If The Television was not just about television but also about TV’s wider 
media culture, Comptiq was also not just about games, but about the wider 
media culture of games, including manga comics. Significantly, it was also 
the source of the development of new content, including an entirely new 
literary format. It was in Comptiq that one of the key serializations of the 
1980s started: Record of Lodoss War (Rodosu-to Senki), a collaborative project 
by a Dungeons and Dragons table-top role-playing game (TRPG) group 
called “Group SNE” led by Yasuda Hiroshi, and turned into a serial noveliza- 
tion by Mizuno Ryo. The Lodoss project started out as a transcript ofa TRPG 
replay. Mizuno’s novel form rewrite of the serialized replay (transcribed 
in the dialogue form of the game) is seen as one of the origins of what 
today is called the “light novel”, a genre of juvenile fiction that increasingly 
dominates book sales in Japan; a genre in which Kadokawa imprints have 
a 70-80% market share.5 Hence, Comptiq is not only an influential game 
magazine, but it also became the starting point for one of Kadokawa’s 
best-selling book formats: the light novel. As Sato Kichinosuke suggests 
in his company history of Kadokawa, Comptiq became a kind of platform 
that gave birth to some of Kadokawa’s most important contents—Lodoss 
in particular and later Lucky Star in the 2000s—a later moment in time 
when the English tagline for Comptiq was, appropriately, “MediaMix Game 
Magazine”.”° 

The animation magazine New Type similarly emerged from The Televi- 
sion, with its writers initially drawn from the animation division of the 
latter (along with Inoue Shin’ichiro, formerly at another anime magazine, 
Animekku, as an associate editor, later a key person in Kadokawa man- 
agement).” New Type quickly became one of the most influential anime 
magazines from the late 1980s to this day, and, like Comptiq, a source of 
new content for Kadokawa media mixes (such as Nagano G0’s Five Star 
Stories). The first issue appeared in March 1985, timed to coincide with 
the release of the Kadokawa animated feature, Kamui no ken (Sat 2007, 


PLATFORM PRODUCER MEETS GAME MASTER 151 


103-104). Marukatsu Famikon, the home video game magazine based around 
the Nintendo NES, debuted soon after, in 1986, and became another key 
Kadokawa magazine that was both a source for information and a platform 
for the creation of new content. 

These magazines and others like them became the launch pads or 
platforms both for new media mixes and for the new model of the media 
mix that Kadokawa Tsuguhiko and his editors Sato Tatsuo and Inoue 
Shinichiro developed in the 1980s. The magazines were important nodes 
for this new model of the media mix for several reasons. First, they were 
framed as “information magazines”, which allowed them both to cover 
other companies’ content, but also to promote Kadokawa’s own content 
through advertising and special articles. Second, while they began as sites 
for the comic versions of existing media such as video games, they quickly 
became hubs for the production of new or original content. This content 
would then be developed across different media forms, resulting in a media 
mix. Third, closely related to the second point, the content producers who 
contributed to these magazines had begun to explore a new model of media 
production that was based around the creation of worlds before individual 
narratives or particular serial installments (whether manga, serial novels, 
OVA animation, or games). Here is where content producers like Otsuka 
Eiji, Yasuda Hitoshi and Mizuno Ryo, and CLAMP became key. Fourth, the 
production of this new content took place using a model of the media mix 
that contrasted sharply with Haruki’s high-risk, high-return model. The 
media mix promoted by Tsuguhiko at the institutional level and through 
the magazines was a new model of low-risk, middle-return, aimed towards 
what would later be called “subcultural” audiences—older teens and young 
adults who searched for more mature content than that offered by the more 
mainstream manga magazines of the time—and using new distribution 
formats like the video tape, as well as new novel imprints such as Sneaker 
Bunko, which later became famous as the go-to site for the light novel 
genre. The magazines inserted themselves into the gaps between the major 
manga magazines of the time that targeted mass audiences, and became 
key platforms for the production and development of a different model of 
the media mix. 


Inventing the Game Master 


If magazines as platforms form one pillar of the Tsuguhiko media mix, the 
development of the role of “game master” or transmedia producer is its other 


152 WORLD BUILDING 


pillar. Mizuno Ryo of Lodoss fame would be one such Kadokawa game master; 
anotheris found in the figure of Otsuka Eiji. Otsuka is well-known as a subcul- 
tural critic, academic, and author of light novels and light novel-writing guides. 
While nominally independent, he has consistently worked with Kadokawa- 
affiliated companies as a freelance manga scriptwriter, novelist, and critic 
since about 1986. Moreover, Otsuka offers an invaluable theoretical exposition 
of the Tsuguhiko media mix in the well-known collection of essays he wrote in 
the late 1980s, Monogatari shéhiron (“A Theory of Narrative Consumption’). 

A Theory of Narrative Consumption has had at least three lives, which, in 
part, follow its multiple re-publications. Otsuka was working full-time for 
Kadokawa Media Office (a subdivision of the publisher under the control of 
Tsuguhiko and the site of many of the magazine editorial boards) at the time 
he wrote it and the book should be read in part as a theoretical elaboration 
of the new media mix structure towards which Tsuguhiko, Otsuka, and his 
close associates at the Media Office were working.” It was written, as Otsuka 
later laments, as a kind of “marketing theory for [ad agency] Dentst and 
Kadokawa” (Otsuka and Azuma 2001 p. 7).”° This was, indeed, the first life of 
the book, taken up most ardently by marketing theorists. The book gained 
a second life in the 2000s by a new generation of theorists. Azuma Hiroki, 
in particular, resuscitates the book by engaging deeply with arguments 
made by Otsuka a decade or so earlier, even as he develops his own theory 
of otaku consumption (Azuma 2001). 

But the book also has a third life: as a critical and crucial example of 
what American production studies scholar John Caldwell calls “industrial 
reflexivity’—a kind of self-theorization ofindustry practice (Caldwell 2008). 
That is, this book offers us a glimpse into the logic behind a model of the 
media mix that—contrary to Azuma’s thesis about a break in consumption 
habits—is still very much alive today, arguably at the heart of contemporary 
media life.” At its core, the book is a meditation on the connection between 
world building and transmedia; it is in this vein that Otsuka describes it in 
his 2012 rewrite of the book. 

Otsuka’s theory of publishing proposed to develop multiple narrative 
fragments on the basis ofa single “worldview” (Otsuka 2007, 244; Otsuka and 
Azuma 2001, 7). This new model of the media mix dovetailed with that in 
development by Kadokawa Tsuguhiko and would form the theoretical basis 
for Otsuka’s practice as editor and creator of manga- and novel-based media 
mixes at Kadokawa, starting with his own Madara manga, video games, 
role-playing games and novels (Otsuka and Azuma 2001, 7; Otsuka 2007, 243). 
While I have looked closely at the mechanics of what Otsuka calls narrative 
consumption and its relation to the worldview elsewhere (Steinberg 2012), I 


PLATFORM PRODUCER MEETS GAME MASTER 153 


would like to focus here on the relationship between world-building and the 
position of what Otsuka calls the “game master” (gému masuta) or “narrative 
controller” (monogatari no kanrisha) (Otsuka 2001, 35), roughly comparable 
to more recent propositions in Hollywood about the role of the transmedia 
producer.” As the use of the term “game master” implies, it is also a figure or 
role influenced by the model of storytelling and play that the table-top RPG 
Dungeons and Dragons brought with it to Japan. 

If Kadokawa Tsuguhiko built magazines and operated as a platform 
producer, the editors and contributors working under Kadokawa Tsuguhiko, 
such as Otsuka, Yasuda, Mizuno, Satō, and others developed a model of 
content creation based around the building of worlds, and the subsequent 
unfolding of narratives within the worlds as particular works (manga series, 
novelizations, on-video animations, etc.). Their medium of choice was, to a 
degree, inconsequential or, at the very least, secondary to the worlds and 
settings behind them. They were first and foremost world producers, or game 
masters, and only secondarily novelists, manga scriptwriters, or game devel- 
opers. Unlike the Haruki model of the media mix, which invariably started 
from an original novel, under Tsuguhiko, the original was the worldview itself 
something that consumers could only access through consuming the various 
manga, novels, video games, and so on that were based on this worldview. 
The absence ofa single original text and the principle of the worldview were 
what gave the Tsuguhiko media mix its infinitely serial character. 

Although less well remembered than either Slayers or Record of the Lodoss 
War, Madara offers a useful site for understanding how the Kadokawa 
Tsuguhiko media mix functioned—because it was an early success of this 
model (albeit shaped by the even earlier success of Lodoss), we see in it the 
role of the “game master” in orchestrating the unfolding media mix, and 
because it makes visible the centrality of world building to this media-mix 
practice. Here, I turn to a brief examination of Madara as a model of the 
Kadokawa Tsuguhiko media mix. 


Producing the Madara Project 


Moryo senki Madara (“Demon Chronicles of Madara”), commonly ab- 
breviated to Madara, began serialization in Kadokawa’s Famikon/NES 
magazine Marukatsu Famikon, kicking off in the 27 November 1987 issue 
of the biweekly publication, at editor Sato Tatsuo’s suggestion. Madara was 
unique for being the first original manga in a game magazine, rather than 
one based on an existing (or forthcoming) game, as was the model until that 


154 WORLD BUILDING 


BRDNTN— 
RPGA="7 


MADARA PROJECT 
SET 
STORY&CONCEPT 


CANDY HOUSE 


WOLD PLAN 


BARRE. 


COMICS ART 


SHES 


8.2: Madara from Marukatsu Famikon, December 11, 1987 issue 


point. This was an era when game publishers typically created tie-in manga 
serializations as a form of cross-promotion. In practice, this tended to limit 
creative license and ensure that the rights were held by game publishers; 
two problems that Madara, as an original creation, could sidestep. In this 
case, rights were not owned by the game publisher, but rather by Kadokawa 
Books and, in this case, the creator of the manga, Otsuka Eiji, who went by 
the pen name “Candy House”. Otsuka (as Candy House) was credited with 
“Story & Concept” and, in some later issues, as “director” as well. 


PLATFORM PRODUCER MEETS GAME MASTER 155 


By this, we should understand Otsuka to be not only the creator, but also 
the producer or director. This was not a mere “manga” it was a project from 
the start. The Madara Project credits appear, with some variation depending 
on the magazine installment, as follows: 


Story & Concept: CANDY HOUSE 
World Plan: Aga Nobuhiro 

Art & Comic: Tajima Shou-ji 
Monster Design: Tsubura Hidetomo 
Directed by CANDY HOUSE”: 


What does it mean to have a “directed by” credit in a comic series? The credit 
gestures to the type of role Otsuka calls a media mix “producer”, pointing to 
the importance ofhaving a transmedia approach to authorship itself.” Otsuka 
(as Candy House) adopts a producer-like role, managing the proper unfolding 
of the franchise. Ata key moment in his Theory of Narrative Consumption, he 
dubs this producer role that of the “game master”. This seems an apt term, 
given that it comes from the realm of the TRPG, where the game master is 
the creator and narrator of the game. This is a significant development in the 
status of the original author, an early incarnation of what would be the 2010 
designation “Transmedia Producer” in Hollywood—although, according to 
Otsuka himself, this conceptualization of the director as producer was itself 
inspired by the role of George Lucas as producer and visionary world-builder 
behind the Star Wars series.” Whether derived from Lucas or not, this world- 
building credit for a media-mix producer became central to transmedia in 
practice around Kadokawa magazines in the late 1980s. 

Madara isa narrative that structurally replicates the tale of the wandering 
hero on a quest, and (as Otsuka points out on many occasions) roughly retells 
the narrative of Tezuka Osamu’s late 1960s manga Dororo: a young man 
(Madara) born to a king is stripped of his “chakra” and is left to die (Tezuka 
2012; Otsuka 2013, 48).”° He is saved, however, and his missing body parts are 
all replaced by mechanical parts, making him, in essence, a cyborg. Whenever 
he defeats one of the domineering overlord Emperor Miroku’s minions, he 
regains one of his stolen chakra. He is accompanied on his travels by a young 
girl, Kirin, who also possesses mysterious powers, and who aids Madara on 
his journey. As Otsuka himself declares, the work on the narrative level is 
an example of structural piracy: the repurposing of an existing narrative 
(Dororo), albeit with a new setting—a vaguely central-Asian fantasy world. 

The narrative here functions as a lure into the world; if the plot points 
are not new, the unfolding world was captivating, as were the visual 


156 WORLD BUILDING 


aesthetics and structure of the manga. Madara was created in the model 
of a role-playing video game, or RPG, popular at the time. As part of the 
preparation for the serialization of Madara, Otsuka enlisted game designer 
Aga Nobuhiro to design the rules for the Madara world; hence, the Madara 
world was implicitly rule-based, like the worlds of Dragon Quest or Dungeons 
and Dragons. These rules mostly lie in the background of narrative, but 
the RPG elements of the game come to the fore periodically in the manga 
(particularly in battle scenes, and “level-ups”). Square inserts with text 
that simulate the 8-bit Famikon text display found in some games appear 
within the manga frames. A combination of narrative information on a 
character and a list of its rank, hit points, karma, and stamina are listed in 
box inserts, in a pixelated typescript reminiscent of the 8-bit game experi- 
ence. Particular moves or types of attack specific to a given character are 
also described in this form, along with the effects such an attack would 
have. This information was arguably superfluous to the narrative itself. 
While it was included in the manga magazine serialization, and in the first 
large-format paperback manga books (first published in August 1989), the 
subsequent paperback manga release removed the RPG-like inserts. 

We can surmise from this removal of the game elements that they did not 
serve an immediate narrative function. Rather, their importance came from 
the way they established the intermedial quality of the manga. They made 
the manga seem as if it was an RPG, even though it wasn’t, nor was it even 
based on one. In this regard, the tagline created for the manga during its 
serialization is noteworthy: “The Bloodcurdling Hyper RPG Comic” (Senritsu 
no haipa RPG komikkku) (11 December 1987) was its original tagline, and “The 
Hyper RPG Comic that Feels 100% Like a Game” (gému kankaku 100% no 
hypa RPG komikku) (27 June 1988) one of the most oft-repeated ones. The 
emphasis on RPG and the game-like is key to the promotion of Madara and 
to its framing as a hybrid narrative-game text. 

A further element to note—significant to both the RPG and the 
Tsuguhiko-style media mix as theorized by Otsuka—is the emphasis on 
the storyworld. Instead of starting with an individual work, Otsuka and his 
collaborators on Madara started by creating the world to which the work 
would belong. Information about the world could itself be marketed or sold 
as an important resource. Rather than placing the importance on a trinity 
of products—the book-film-soundtrack of the Haruki media mix—the 
Tsuguhiko media mix rather put the emphasis on the consumption of the 
world upon which products were based. The result was that any number 
of products could be created out ofa given world. This was particularly the 
case with series like Madara that operated on the principle of rebirth and 


PLATFORM PRODUCER MEETS GAME MASTER 157 


veo.) 
per esa tike 


titeni ikih: 2), bin 


ree i ere roy 
dara 


eaten fs 


| 
Bee 


| 


8.3: Madara settei from Marukatsu Famikon, December 11, 1987 issue 


reincarnation.” From a production angle, the narrative functions as a lure 
to the world, and it is through the various serializations that this world is 
accessed and expanded. 

Madara was quite explicit about this; at the end of every installment of the 
comic, there was a “Settings Collection” (settei-shu) page: a special informa- 
tion section on main characters, their monster adversaries, or the world. This 


158 WORLD BUILDING 


page offered a detailed fragment of information about one element of the 
larger Madara world (settei being a substitute term for sekai or world; Otsuka 
uses the terms interchangeably in his A Theory of Narrative Consumption). 

While the serialization was eventually turned into an actual RPG game 
for the Famikon, and then a direct-to-video anime, the setting pages also 
enticed readers to create their own narratives. Madara thus plugged into 
the existing culture of amateur comic creation, fostering it further at various 
stages, with periodic invitations for readers to contribute character designs 
of monsters, for instance, that would be used in later moments of the manga. 
Crowd-sourcing the production, and the involvement of an active fan base, 
were key elements of this version of the media mix. There were even of- 
ficially published Madara Official Pirate Editions (Otsuka and Tajima 1991), 
filled with works culled from those sent in by fans. Otsuka describes this as 
a joke at the time, but it was one that was inspired by the open structure of 
the Madara world, in which the character was described as possessing 108 
lives—far too many for Otsuka and Tajima to write themselves. Therefore, 
the very narrative setting was also an open invitation for fans to participate 
in the writing of the storyworld. Madara had what we would call today an 
“open architecture” that encouraged user-generated-contents. Indeed, it 
very much anticipates the mobilization of fan production (and fan labor) for 
official releases today. In all of this, Otsuka functioned as a project director 
and producer of the media-mix franchise. 


Conclusion 


By way of conclusion, it is worth returning here to a figure we started with: 
Kadokawa Tsuguhiko. What role did Tsuguhiko play? He was certainly not the 
auteurist producer that his older brother Haruki was—he wasn't someone who 
intervened in the minutiae of media-mix production. Rather, he was a pioneer 
of anew kind of figure: the infrastructure producer, or what we might call the 
platform producer. Tsuguhiko produced the platforms that became the basis 
for “content” development by media mix directors/producers like Otsuka, 
Yasuda, and Mizuno. He built the magazine infrastructure and put together 
the institutional know-how and departments within Kadokawa that would go 
on to oversee the production of straight to video animation (or OVA), games, 
and so on. As I noted at the opening of this article, Tsuguhiko retrospectively 
describes magazines like Za Television, Comptiq, and Marukatsu Famikon as 
platforms. Having created the conditions necessary for the development of 
a relatively new form of media mix based around figures like Otsuka and 


PLATFORM PRODUCER MEETS GAME MASTER 159 


Mizuno, Kadokawa Tsuguhiko’s role was as a relatively detached platform 
producer. In this model, the platform producer builds the media upon which 
the media mix director depends; the latter in turn builds narrative or content 
worlds and orchestrates transmedia development. 

Of course, it is worth recalling that the emphasis on worlds is not unique 
to the Japanese media ecology. Indeed, as I noted in passing above, the 
Hollywood embrace of transmedia in the 2000s is, in some ways, funda- 
mentally indebted to Japan’s unfolding media mix—even as key figures of 
the Japanese media mix such as Kadokawa Tsuguhiko and Otsuka point 
to Dungeons and Dragons and Star Wars as key inspirations for their own 
media mix ventures. Transmedia in the North American context and the 
media mix in Japan are, then, closely intertwined, one building on the 
other. But as I have shown here, two elements played a fundamental role at 
a formative moment in the development of the media mix in Japan around 
Kadokawa in the 1980s: the magazine as platform and the game master 
as media-agnostic coordinator of the media mix. Together, they were the 
support and the guidance for the creation of media-mix worlds and, as 
such, they are also the necessary conditions or media a priori for this very 
particular kind of transmedia development. 


Notes 


L The Producers Guild of America created the new credit, “Transmedia Pro- 
ducer’, in 2010. http://www.producersguild.org/?page=coc_nm#transmedia 

2. For useful accounts of Niconico Video, see: Johnson and Nozawa. 

Author interview with Kadokawa Tsuguhiko, 23 June 2013. 

4. The following builds on additional archival research and interviews of key 
Kadokawa personnel that I incorporated into the expanded, rewritten ver- 
sion of Anime’s Media Mix, published in Japanese as Naze Nihon wa “media 
mikkusu suru kuni” nanoka / Why is Japan a “Media Mixing Nation’?). 

5. For a highly informative account of Kadokawa Haruki’s filmmaking activi- 
ties, see: Zahlten. 

6. These can be contrasted with “megahits” such as Pokémon or Yokai Watch, 
which target children as their main audience and aim at mainstream success. 

7. For another take on this transition and debates around media convergence, 
see: Oyama and Lolli 2016. 

8. Kadokawa, “Atarashii shuppan wo motomete,” 5. 

Unlike Kindle there is no hardware version of BookWalker, but the service is 
available as an app on iOS and Android devices, as well as for computers. 

10. Interview with Kadokawa Tsuguhiko, 26 June 2013. 

u. Ibidem. 


160 


12. 


13. 


14. 


15. 


16. 


17. 
18. 


19. 


20. 


21. 


22. 


23. 


24. 


25. 
26. 


27. 


WORLD BUILDING 


Of course, in marking 1982 as the beginning of the magazine era, the Tsug- 
uhiko-era narrations of the company history also efface its earlier forays into 
monthly magazine production, started by Kadokawa Haruki. Indeed, it’s neces- 
sary here to recognize that the success of The Television is built on the media 
system Haruki set up. The first hit issues of The Television used Kadokawa Haru- 
ki Office actresses like Yakushimaru Hiroko—a star at the time—on the cover. 
Hence, while I distinguish the Haruki-style media mix from the Tsuguhiko- 
style media mix, the latter benefited from conditions set up by the former. 
Interview with Kadokawa Tsuguhiko, 26 June 2013. 

Sato Tatsuo, quoted in “Géma wa motto keieisha wo mezasu beki! (Gam- 
ers should aim to be managers!”), 12" edition, http://www.qgamer.net/ 
games/g99/G999905/20130704001/. 

Though Otsuka notes that Lodoss is only one of several possible origins of 
the light novel format. See also: Kawasaki and likura. 

Sato, Subete wa koko kara hajimaru, 95. Comptiq featured the subtitle “Medi- 
aMix Game Magazine” from September 2003 to November 2012. 

Interview with Otsuka Eiji, 24 March 2013. 

This book, originally published in 1989, was expanded and republished in 
2001 as Teihon monogatari shôhiron, then substantially rewritten and re- 
published again in 2012 as Monogatari shohiron kai (“A Theory of Narrative 
Consumption, Revisited”). 

On Otsuka’s entry into Kadokawa Media Office and the conditions he had al- 
ready conceived for a more minor type of media mix, see: Otsuka 1999, 264-269. 
Dentsi is the largest advertising agency in Japan and took close note of the 
theory of narrative consumption Otsuka developed. 

This is how I would read Otsuka’s rewrite of the book in its most recent ver- 
sion, Monogatari shohiron kai, as a reflection on the conditions of its first era 
of publication, as they extend into the media world of the present moment. 
In 2010, the Producers Guild of America created a special new credit: 
“Transmedia Producer”. See: http://www.producersguild.org/?page=coc_ 
nm#transmedia. 

This credit sequence is taken from the 12 February 1988 issue of Marukatsu 
Famikon. 

Interview with Otsuka Eiji, 24 March 2013. For useful reconsiderations of 
the role of authorship in the American context, see: Gray and Johnson. 
Interview with Otsuka Eiji, 4 July 2014. 

Otsuka’s fascination with structural piracy comes in no small part from the 
important place of structuralist narratology on his conception of storytelling. 
In this regard, his own education as an ethnographer coincided with the rather 
late translation and introduction of Propp in Japan during the late 1970s and 
early 1980s, which had a profound impact on his sense of storytelling. 

In the 2000s, the loop narrative would take on this structuring role, enabling 
similarly spiraling serialization, as in the Suzumiya Haruhi, Steins; Gate or 
Fate/Stay Night franchises. 


PLATFORM PRODUCER MEETS GAME MASTER 161 
Works Cited 


Azuma, Hiroki. 2001. Dobutsuka suru posutomodan(The Animalizing Postmodern). 
(Tokyo: Kédansha, 2001); translated by Jonathan E. Abel and Shion Kono as 
Otaku: Japan’s Database Animals. 2009. Minneapolis: University of Minesota 
Press. 

Caldwell, John. 2008. Production Culture: Industrial Reflexivity and Critical Practice 
in Film and Television. Durham: Duke University Press. 

Condry, Ian. 2013. The Soul of Anime: Collaborative Creativity and Japan’s Media 
Success Story. Durham: Duke University Press. 

Eisenmann, Thomas R.; Parker, Geoffrey; and Van Alstyne, Marshall W. 2006. 
“Strategies for Two-Sided Markets.” Harvard Business Review, October 2006. 
Gray, Jonathan; and Johnson, Derek (eds.). 2013. Companion to Media Authorship. 

Malden, MA: Wiley Blackwell. 

Jenkins, Henry. 2006. Convergence Culture: Where Old and New Media Collide. New 
York: New York University Press. 

Johnson, Daniel. 2013. “Polyphonic/Pseudo-synchronic: Animated Writing in the 
Comment Feed of Nicovideo.” Japan Studies 33:3 (December), 297-313. 

Kadokawa, Tsuguhiko. 1982. “Kadokawa Shoten, hatsu no shtkansi’ sokan ni 
atatte” (On the occasion of the first issue of “Kadokawa Shoten’s first weekly 
magazine”). lin: Kadokawa Shoten soritsu 38 shünen (Kadokawa Books 38 Years 
From its Founding), annual internal pamphlet. 

Kadokawa, Tsuguhiko. 1984. “Atarashii shuppan wo motomete’” (In pursuit of new 
publishing). In: Kadokawa Shoten soritsu 40 shtinen (Kadokawa Books 40 Years 
From its Founding), annual internal pamphlet. 

Kadokawa, Tsuguhiko. 2013. Google, Apple ni makenai chosakkenho (Copyright 
Laws that Google and Apple Can’t Beat). Tokyo: Kadokawa. 

Kawasaki, Takuto; and Yoshiyuki, Iikura. 2009. “Ranobe kyara wa taj sakuhin 
sekai no yume o miru ka?” (Do light novel characters dream of a world of mul- 
tiple works?). In: Raito noberu kenkyitjosetsu, edited by Ichiyanigi Hirotaka and 
Kume Yoriko. Tokyo: Seikyusha. 

Lamarre, Thomas. 2009. The Anime Machine: A Media Theory of Animation. Min- 
neapolis: University of Minnesota Press. 

Murphy, Sheila. 2011. How Television Invented New Media. New Brunswick: Rutgers 
University Press. 

Nozawa, Shunsuke. 2012. “The Gross Face and Virtual Fame: Semiotic Media- 
tion in Japanese Virtual Communication.” First Monday 17(5) (March). http:// 
firstmonday.org/ojs/index.php/fm/article/view/3535/3168. 

Otsuka, Eiji. 1989. Monogatari shohiron (A Theory of Narrative Consumption). 
Tokyo: Shinyosha. 


162 WORLD BUILDING 


Otsuka, Eiji. 1999. “Boku to Miyazaki Tsutomu no ’80 nendai, #17: Komikku to 
media mikkusu’” (Miyazaki Tsutomu and my 1980s, #17: Comics and the media 
mix). Shokun! (April ). 

Otsuka, Eiji. 2001. Tethon Monogatari shohiron (A Theory of Narrative Consumption: 
Standard Edition). Tokyo: Kadokawa. 

Otsuka, Eiji. 2003. Kyarakutd shosetsu no tsukurikata (How to make character 
novels). Tokyo: Kédansha. 

Otsuka, Eiji. 2007. “Otaku” no seishinshi: 1980 nendairon (A History of the “Otaku” 
Mind: On the 1980s). Tokyo: Asahi bunko. 

Otsuka, Eiji. 2012. Monogatari shohiron kai (A Theory of Narrative Consumption, 
Revisited). Tokyo: Kadokawa. 

Otsuka, Eiji; and Azuma, Hiroki. 2001. “Hihyð to otaku to posutomodan’” (Critique 
and the otaku postmodern). Shdsetsu Torippa (Spring 2001). 

Otsuka, Eiji; and Tajima, Shou-ji. 1991. Ninshiki Madara kaizoku-ban (Madara 
Official Pirate Editions). Tokyo: Kadokawa. 

Oyama, Shinji; and Lolli, Dario. 2016. “When the Media Do Not Quite Converge: 
The Case of Fuji TV and Livedoor.” In: Media Convergence in Japan, edited by 
Partrick W. Galbraith and Jason Karlin. Kinema Club. 

Picard, Martin. 2013. “The Foundation of Geemu: A Brief History of Early Japanese 
video games.” Game Studies: The International Journal of Computer Game 
Research 13:2 (December ). 

Picard, Martin; and Pelletier-Gagnon, Jérémie. 2015. “Introduction: Geemu, media mix, 
and the state of Japanese video game studies.” Kinephanos, Vol 5 (December), 1-19. 

Producers Guild of America, “Transmedia Producer.” http://www.producersguild. 
org/?page=coc_nm#transmedia. 

Sato, Kichinosuke. 2007. Subete wa koko kara hajimaru: Kadokawa Gripu wa nani 
wo mezasu ka (Everything Starts From Here: What Kadokawa Group is Aiming 
For). Tokyo: Kadokawa Group Holdings. 

Schmidt, Eric; and Rosenberg, Jonathan. 2014. How Google Works. New York: Grand 
Central Publishing. 

Steinberg, Marc. 2012. Anime’s Media Mix: Franchising Toys and Characters in 
Japan. Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press. 

Steinberg, Marc. 2015. Naze Nihon wa “media mikkusu suru kuni” nanoka (Why is 
Japan a “Media Mixing Nation”?), translated by Nakagawa Yuzuru, supervised 
by Otsuka Eiji. Tokyo: KADOKAWA. 

Tajima, Shou-ji, Kaga Nobuhiro, Candy House. “Moryo senki Madara.” Marukatsu 
Famikon, 27 November 1987, 47-62. 

Tezuka, Osamu. 2012. Dororo. New York: Vertical. 

Zahlten, Alexander. 2007 The Role of Genre in Film From Japan: Transformations 
1960s-2000s, Ph.D. dissertation, University of Mainz, 2007. 


PLATFORM PRODUCER MEETS GAME MASTER 163 
Media Cited 


Kamui no ken (The Dagger of Kamui). Directed by Rintaro. 1985. Animeigo, 2003. 
DVD. 


About the author 


Marc Steinberg is Associate Professor of Film Studies at Concordia Univer- 
sity, Montreal. He is the author of the award-winning books Anime’s Media 
Mix: Franchising Toys and Characters in Japan (University of Minnesota 
Press, 2012) and Naze Nihon wa “media mikkusu suru kuni” nano ka (Why is 
Japan a “Media Mixing Nation”?) (Tokyo: KADOKAWA, 2015). He is also the 
co-editor of the volume Media Theory in Japan (Duke University Press, 2017). 


9. Narrative Ecosystems 
A Multidisciplinary Approach to Media Worlds’ 


Veronica Innocenti and Guglielmo Pescatore 


Boni, Marta (ed.), World Building. Transmedia, Fans, Industries. Amster- 
dam University Press, 2017 


DOI: 10.5117/9789089647566/CHog 


Abstract 

This chapter presents the model of “narrative ecosystems’, examining 
their specific features: they are inhabited by narrative forms, characters, 
and viewers that get modified through space and time; they are intercon- 
nected structures; they tend to reach and maintain a certain degree of 
equilibrium (stability, balance), orchestrating a persistent world that 
persists beyond the small screen and that modifies itself in dynamic 
ways according to developmental paradigms often unforeseen; they are 
non-procedural systems, not determined by a syntagmatic sequence of 
functions, but by declarative elements that describe the reference envi- 
ronment, making the narrative material a narrative universe that might 
be traveled over by the user in unprecedented ways; they are formed by an 
abiotic component (the media environment) and by a biotic component 
(the narrative forms). Inhabiting a narrative ecosystem is a distributed 
and diversified experience that generates participation. Traditional tools 
for the narrative analysis (semiotics, narratology, etc.) are no longer suit- 
able for such new serial forms. Other disciplines, such as information 
architecture may offer useful interpretative tools. 


Keywords: Narrative Ecosystems, Vast Narratives, Resilience, Narrative 
Prediction, Contemporary Television 

Introduction 

This paper aims to propose an original approach to the investigation of vast 


audiovisual narratives, namely TV series, according to a new theoretical 
perspective that we label the “narrative ecosystem”. With the term “vast 


NARRATIVE ECOSYSTEMS 165 


narratives”, we refer, in the first place, to contemporary US TV shows that, 
according to Noah Wardrip-Fruin and Pat Harrigan, are characterized 
by the need to maintain an “ongoing structure with narrative consist- 
ency and thematic coherence throughout large numbers of episodes and 
sometimes seasons” (2009, 4). Our proposal is to study vast narratives 
through the narrative ecosystem paradigm, a model that encompasses a 
cross-disciplinary approach to TV studies. In the past 20 years, TV serial 
dramas, particularly those from the US, have enjoyed great success among 
viewers worldwide and have stimulated considerable critical attention 
from media scholars. 

It is evident today that traditional narrative formulas have gone through 
a process of mutation and hybridization, gaining strong elements of 
temporal progression and narrative development that were missing in 
previous formulas. Therefore, contemporary TV resists the risk of narrative 
atrophy by creating a diegetic world in which changes at all levels—of the 
characters, scenes, and narrative techniques—are continuously sought, as 
well as valued and celebrated, by fans. TV series have anomalous features 
as far as their narrative progression is concerned: they are “abnormal” 
objects, which overflow in time and space. They last for many years and 
are, moreover, able to branch out across different media, as per the model 
of transmedia storytelling (Jenkins 2006), thereby generating other texts in 
different media environments. This capacity to overflow across the media 
landscape is the result of a mutation: we are dealing with objects that are 
no longer self-conclusive and finished texts, but instead have become 
long-lasting transmedia phenomena. We are referring, in particular, to the 
fact that TV series have become very elaborate as far as their transmedia 
extensions are concerned. In this respect, transmedia extensions may, 
of course, “broaden the timeline of the aired material, as happens when 
we rely on comics to fill in back story or play out the long term ramifica- 
tions of the depicted events (see for example the use of animation in the 
build-up to The Dark Knight or The Matrix Reloaded)” (Jenkins 2009). But, 
more than this, they also require a strong investment of time and energy 
in order to collect all the spread narrative pieces and to assemble them 
into a meaningful whole. Finally, contemporary TV series are also long- 
lasting phenomena by virtue of all the possibilities offered by new modes 
of production, distribution, and consumption, as has happened in cases 
such as The Killing and Arrested Development, shows cancelled by their 
networks and later revived by Netflix. 

We propose a new interpretative model: the narrative ecosystem. We 
believe this is a response to the need for a dynamic model that represents 


166 WORLD BUILDING 


vast narratives, accounting for the interactions of agents, changes, and 
evolutions. Production and management studies intertwined with cultural 
studies (Johnson 2013) are already going in the direction we support. Our 
theoretical proposal thus aims to encompass this approach with a dia- 
chronic view of the media objects as well as with a method to predict the 
evolution of a specific TV show. This last goal still needs work and effort 
in order to figure out a predictive model that might be useful to the media 
industry. In this paper, in order to address this absence, we have started to 
draw together some theoretical observations based on ecological selection 
and evolution patterns, which we present below. 


Something Borrowed, Something New... 


What makes contemporary TV serial narratives so innovative and engaging 
for the viewer? First of all, contemporary TV series offer viewers an entire 
universe rather than a single story. Consider, for instance, what happened 
with Heroes and with the ARG (Alternate Reality Game) Heroes 360° Experi- 
ence, or with the Lost Experience—an ARG played by fans during the second 
season of Lost in the UK, and in the interval between the end of the second 
season and the beginning of the third in the US. These are clear examples of 
an extension of the series’ narrative along several digital (but also physical) 
platforms (see: Evans 2011; Clarke 2013). 

Contemporary TV series’ narratives no longer have a single center of 
irradiation but, rather, tend to develop along different roads; therefore, the 
traditional tools of narrative analysis, which once considered the story as 
having an oriented and targeted (if complex and labyrinthine)’ direction, 
are no longer able to give a full account of new forms of TV series narration. 
Indeed, compared to traditional concepts of story and text, contemporary 
TV series enact some significant changes. 

First of all, there is a relevant switch from textual forms to modular 
content. A distinctive feature of high concept audiovisual productions is 
its modular structure, which means that content may be parceled out and 
replicated in different recreational or entertainment contexts, allowing 
fragmentation, displacement, and diversification of use. Many contempo- 
rary TV series can be labeled as high concept,’ that is to say, as objects that 
are recognizable, well-defined, and have an iconic look. High-concept TV 
narratives often adopt multilinear narratives that inspire additional narra- 
tion via other media. Contemporary series are made of narrative matrices, 
developed on multiple platforms independently from what happens on TV, 


NARRATIVE ECOSYSTEMS 167 


yet they are nonetheless influenced by the atmosphere and ambience of 
the source series. These objects become true long sellers and are subject to 
re-styling for each season as they take the form of a complex constellation 
of products, grouped around a single brand. 

The second change is the shift from oriented forms of storytelling to 
universes in expansion. TV serial narratives have achieved exceptional 
duration—with products lasting for many seasons—and persistence 
among audiences—whose engagement and commitment to a series can last 
for years. We can think, for instance, of the British series Doctor Who, first 
begun in 1963, cancelled in 1989, revamped in 2005 and still in production 
with a total, for now, of 26 seasons and more than 800 episodes. A text 
like Doctor Who is a very good example of an object that can last for years, 
even with some leaps here and there, and that demands of its audience 
a constant dedication in order to keep it alive, as is also demonstrated 
by all the ancillary products that contribute to the composition of the 
narrative ecosystem (see: Hill's “Traversing the “Whoniverse”: Doctor Who's 
Hyperdiegesis and Transmedia Discontinuity/Diachrony” in this volume). 
Although long narrative arcs and audience engagement are also typical 
of soap operas, the contemporary productions we are interested in have 
a high degree of narrative complexity that differentiates them from soap 
operas. We can also observe that the features just described seem to be 
typical of the US and UK productions, while the Italian TV industry, for 
instance, is subject to different rules and modes of production as well as 
to different narrative structures. 

In the contemporary mediascape, textual structures have changed 
substantially. Expanding universes are durable, textured, and full of rich 
relationships among characters, the diegetic world, and the audience 
(Carini 2010). In short, they are universes that are inhabitable. Some con- 
temporary series allow the viewer to have an active role in the process of 
construction and development of the narrative universe. For example, Julie 
Plec, creator of The Vampire Diaries said to have worked on a new narrative 
thread on the show following protests spread on social networks by many 
fans calling for further details on some blind spots in the narrative. Fans’ 
contribution to the series’ development can also be found in the realm of 
unofficial paratextual productions, such as fan fictions, fan art, and so 
on. In such cases, some of the stories written by the fans and published on 
fan-fiction websites have, for example, the function of filling in the gaps 
left by the original screenplays, enriching the characters with nuances 
and otherwise unexpressed emotional implications, while others tend to 
establish romantic relationships between characters who are only briefly 


168 WORLD BUILDING 


mentioned in the show. The active participation of the viewers and the 
impact of the narration on the real world are further demonstrated, for 
instance, by the proliferation of Twitter accounts of characters from the 
series, including both official accounts associated with the network and 
unofficial ones managed by fans themselves. 

A third, important change is the passage from story to user experience. 
Contemporary TV series, as mentioned, consist of a multiplicity of narrative 
elements. Alongside the weekly episodes designed for television viewing, 
we also find a multitude of material (e.g. webisodes, mobisodes, recaps) 
more typical of transmedia storytelling, which allows the user easier access 
to complex story universes. Modular content puts the viewer in a new 
position in relation to the series: the viewer needs to orient herself within 
the highly complex architecture ofthis production, among the large amount 
of information constantly provided. In order to enhance this orientation 
process, all the media objects that belong to the same narrative universe act 
as interfaces between the viewer and the bulk of sometimes unmanageable 
narrative material accumulated by these productions. Therefore, the weekly 
episodes allow viewers to connect and pass through the expanding narra- 
tive universe. Narrative elements are able to fulfill an important function of 
placemaking: they help the viewers reduce confusion and favor their entry, 
exit, and return to complex and layered narrative universes of different 
spaces that exist within diegetic, physical, and digital space (Resmini and 
Rosati 2011). Viewers must be capable of moving within the narrative paths 
and to link one narrative element to another. Although the series is made 
up of recurring situations and, despite the standardization of its universe, 
it develops different morphologies that are not completely predictable. As 
such, the configuration of the narrative universe is a negotiating process 
between the use (fruition, experience, and production) and the project 
(screenplay, media delivery, and marketing). 

The fourth switch is the important change from texts to interfaces. 
Viewing a TV series no longer concludes when the weekly episode has been 
viewed; instead, it has become a long-term process that largely ignores the 
typical temporal patterning of these texts (i.e. one episode per week aired in 
a predetermined time slot). The weekly episode is only the starting point for 
the viewer's engagement, since she is increasingly called on to interact with 
the series in an intense and rich participatory activity. As Francesco Casetti 
underlines, there is a wide spectrum of practices activated by viewers that 
makes “the spectator a true performer, someone who constructs his own 
viewing conditions, bringing himself to bear directly upon them” (Casetti 
2015, 189). The textual objects that build up the series universe (episodes, 


NARRATIVE ECOSYSTEMS 169 


but also webisodes, mobisodes, or recaps) act as interfaces that allow the 
viewer to navigate a highly complex architecture, modulating the viewer’s 
relationship with the series’ universe and acting as the design tools of a 
narrative experience. 

A relevant case is the use of temporal disturbances in Lost (flashbacks, 
flash-forwards, flash-sideways), which are more than just tools for mod- 
eling the narrative material since they, in fact, have a strong impact on 
the configuration of the audience experience. Through these temporal 
disturbances, the user experiences processes of fragmentation and of 
reconstruction, both of the narrative material and of the series’ temporal 
flow. TV watching becomes the vehicle of plural, more complex mean- 
ings. The show expands beyond its borders (the weekly episode) and is 
the result of a composite constellation of texts, including spin-offs, comic 
books, show-inspired novels, websites (amateur or not), and video games 
that create environments and characters that allow the fans to role-play. 
Watching a TV series becomes a distributed and diversified experience, 
which often leads audience members to go back and forth between the 
physical and the digital, generating participation and stimulating further 
consumption. It is something closer to living in the world of the program, 
rather than simply following a storyline. 


The Narrative Ecosystem 


As we have mentioned, our focus is on audiovisual texts that have a 
modular structure. These texts can be serialized and (re-)used in different 
contexts and at different times, according to customized schedules.?The 
texts can be assembled in communities of viewers who share an interest 
towards them. Nowadays, dominant narrative forms are characterized by 
increasing interactivity, opening up more and more space and autonomy 
to a new kind of active user. A vast narrative represents an evolution of 
“story”, that is to say, an ongoing and intricately developed storyline, 
with many characters and multiple settings (Harrigan and Wardrip-Fruin 
2009). Many contemporary TV series are the result of an ecosystemic 
design, in which a general model is developed in advance as an evolution- 
ary system with a high degree of consistency among all its components. 
We can therefore move from the idea of “text” to that of the “narrative 
ecosystem’, a system bearing a specific set of characteristics that can be 
defined as follows: 


170 WORLD BUILDING 


— Narrative ecosystems are open systems, inhabited by stories and 
characters that change through time and space, in which changes 
of setting, character, and even temporality are specific traits of TV 
series; 

— They are interconnected structures: sequels and prequels, reboots, 
spin-off, and crossovers are all in a dialogic relationship with each 
other (Innocenti and Pescatore 2008); 

— They tend to reach and maintain balance over time, producing a 
sustained and persistent universe that lasts outside the space of the 
screen, while being modified according to unpredictable lines of 
development; 

— They are not determined by a syntagmatic sequence of functions, 
but rather by elements that describe environments, characters and 
relationships, letting the viewer travel through the narrative universe; 

— They are made up of an abiotic component (the media context) and a 
biotic component (the narrative structure). The narrative material is 
alive, undergoing processes of competition, adaptation, change, modi- 
fication, etc.; while the abiotic component is provided by the media 
landscape in which the TV series is included. That media landscape 
is shaped by the economic and cultural structure of specific nations 
(Hilmes 2013). 


As this outline indicates, TV series are therefore open systems; they are 
comparable to natural environments, resilient in both time and space, 
and they combine and integrate narratives, characters, and users in a 
specific media space. In a narrative ecosystem, producers and viewers 
share the responsibility for the series’ evolution. As far as the producers 
are concerned, they create predictions based on the results of the TV 
series in terms of ratings and the number of viewers—this is the top- 
down approach. This data provides orientation toward investments and 
resource allocation, such as marketing campaigns, scheduling, target 
definition, and advertising revenues (Ferguson 2008, 156-160). Fans also 
make previsions (the bottom-up approach), since they act as acommunity 
held together by a shared interest in the life, duration, and resilience of 
TV series.’ 

Ecosystems tend to reach and maintain a certain balance over time, 
orchestrating a sustained and stable universe. The system is in equilibrium 
when it is consistent and resilient. It is consistent when it is capable of suit- 
ing the purposes, contexts, and people for whom it was designed (internal 
consistency) and when it can maintain the same logic and recognizability 


NARRATIVE ECOSYSTEMS 171 


within the different media, environments, and times in which it acts (ex- 
ternal consistency). It is resilient when it is capable of shaping and adapting 
itself for different users, needs, and experiential strategies. Resilience 
indicates the ability of the system to react to changes (overall radical or 
unexpected changes) and re-establish its equilibrium. Historically, TV series 
have been built on long-running narratives, and have had a strong degree 
of consistency and persistence. They are also resilient because they can 
survive various perturbations; both external ones—such as changes in 
programming slots, a decline in ratings, varying audiences, or exceptional 
events (for example, the writers’ strike that lasted 100 days between 2007 
and 2008)—as well as internal ones—like radical changes in the cast, the 
defection of actors, and spoiling phenomena.’ 

Contemporary TV series, as we pointed out above, are no longer simple 
textual objects, they are instead the result of an ecosystemic design, in 
which a general model is developed in advance as an evolutionary system 
with a high degree of consistency between all its components. Moreover, 
insofar as they are non-procedural systems, narrative ecosystems turn the 
narrative material into a universe in which the viewer can travel, and in 
which the experience can be randomly reconfigured. As part of an eco- 
system, the weekly episode is just one of the potential entry points that 
allow the viewer to become immersed in the narrative. Access to the series’ 
narrative universe does not necessarily have to happen through the weekly 
episode aired on TV, but might be, instead, stimulated by other narratives 
that are linked to the TV series and supported by other media, such as viral 
videos, mobisodes, or comic books, as it might happen with The Walking 
Dead or the Marvel Cinematic Universe. 

Finally, all these features stress the relational nature of transmedia 
convergent systems, as well as their complex character and propensity 
to propagate themselves. It also suggests its complementary tendencies 
of splitting, appropriation, or re-appropriation. In order to function, 
a cross-media narrative ecosystem has to be sufficiently resilient to 
allow potentially infinite propagations, interpolations, and spin-offs. 
Here, we can perceive the dialectic between order and disorder, balance 
and chaos that is typical to complex systems (Gandolfi 1999; Bocchi 
and Ceruti 2007; Morin 2011). In other words, it reflects the manifold 
tensions between project and practice, internal and external processes, 
constraints and allowances. The set of hypotheses proposed here allows 
us to go beyond the aporia of textuality/fruition. Moreover, the shift 
of perspective on narrative ecosystems makes space for the study of 
media products as artifacts that, like many others, inhabit our world, 


172 WORLD BUILDING 


furnishing and extending it according to a cumulative logic of unpredict- 
able directions. 

In the final section of this chapter, we will focus on the relevance of vast 
narratives in contemporary media production and, in particular, on the 
possibility of predicting the life of vast narratives through a set of criteria.’ 
This research is still in an early stage and we recognize that our approach 
still lacks a method for predictive workin the field of TV serial narratives, or 
at least a model of development. Such an advance in our research would be 
significant in that it would push the ecosystemic model from an analytical 
dimension to a more operative one, allowing scholars to understand the 
dynamics of an ecosystem from a predictive point of view. In the hope 
of approaching this goal, we will outline some theoretical foundations, 
drawing on ecological selection and evolution patterns in nature that might 
be helpful in building a computational method of narrative prediction in 
our field of interest. 


The Selection Process in a Narrative Ecosystem 


With the purpose of understanding how narrative ecosystems evolve 
according to specific environmental pressures, we shall first draw on the 
notion of ecological selection (Smith and Smith 2003). Ecological selection 
applies to the individuals of a population and has to do with their ability 
to adapt, survive, and breed. In our case, focusing on single storyworlds 
rather than on the overall television landscape, we shall apply this notion 
to the characters of a narrative ecosystem. While in natural ecosystems the 
environment exerts selection over population, in the case of TV series it is 
the producer that forces adaptation between a TV show and its audience, 
by modifying the narrative according to the tastes and demands of the 
audience in order to maximize ratings and revenues. As ecological niches 
exert the selection pressures that push populations in various directions, 
one species could give rise to diversity within the same population. In 
particular, accounting for directional changes of a specific trait, natural 
selection can be classified in three major categories: stabilizing, direc- 
tional, and diversifying selection. We apply these same categories to the 
distribution of characters, focusing on the way producers select them. 
Producers can insert new characters and exclude or modify the role of 
old ones in order to improve the series’ performance and profitability. We 
have observed that patterns of selection in TV series are based on the three 
selection models detected in a natural ecosystem. 


NARRATIVE ECOSYSTEMS 173 


— Stabilizing selection: diversity decreases and the population tends to 
stabilize on a particular trait value—the stronger one. Graphically, 
we can see that the two extremes are selected against, favoring the 
intermediate variants. One of the most evident cases of this selection 
model is the medical drama House MD. As the series continues, the 
character of Dr. Gregory House proves to be the most appreciated by 
the audience. Its basic features and attitude are therefore boosted by 
producers, resulting in a peak of the curve that decreases the relevance 
of the other characters throughout its eight seasons. On the one hand, 
this behavior might increase the TV series’ appeal; on the other hand, 
it might cause instability, ultimately decreasing the resilience of the 
system. A slight misalignment between the producers’ behavior and 
the audiences’ taste can negatively affect TV shows’ performance. In 
the case of House MD, in fact, after first focusing on the character of 
Greg House, there was a comeback and reintroduction of old characters 
that had been removed for a while. 


- Directional selection: only one extreme of the trait distribution is 
selected, resulting in a shift of the curve peak to the other extreme. 
This phenomenon often occurs under environmental changes. Simi- 
larly, in narrative ecosystems, changes and upheavals can affect the 
ecosystem itself, which consequently needs to endure and to adapt 
to the new environment, often selecting new strong features to focus 
on. An evident case comes again from the field of medical dramas. 
In E.R., for instance, we can see how this directional selection has 
been carried out for fifteen seasons, leading to a complete change in 


174 WORLD BUILDING 


the set of characters. Indeed, E.R. operates a setting that allows for 
the removal and introduction of characters and storylines according 
to internal or external needs: a decline in ratings, the defection of 
actors, or exceptional events. This leads to constant shifts from one 
narrative focus to another, which drives the creation and stabilization 
of new peaks. When changes come from contingent reasons, then the 
shift itself can be the cause of a bad alignment between the tastes 
or demands of the audience and the series’ narrative structure. This 
behavior can also be adopted by the producers in order to fix misalign- 
ments between the narrative set and audience tastes and demands, 
especially when the audience composition changes. 


Selection against an extrem 


— Diversifying selection: both extremes are selected at the expense of 
intermediate values. Graphically, the result is a two-peaked curve 
in which the variance of the trait increases and the population is 
divided into two different groups. Diversifying selection can affect 
narrative ecosystems as well, creating two different narrative peaks 
inside the same universe that eventually results in the creation of 
a new one. This situation can give rise to spin-offs, shows derived 
from already existing works and focusing on a certain character 
or set of characters. Among many others, this happens for Buffy 
the Vampire Slayer and its spin-off Angel. Though the two worlds 
are separated by spatial boundaries—they indeed are two different 
shows—crossovers are allowed and often employed. This behavior 
is adopted in order to extend commercial airtime, thus maximizing 
revenues. There might be a downside to this practice; for instance, 


NARRATIVE ECOSYSTEMS 175 


the risk that the character, taken outside its original environment, 
does not stimulate the same audience interest and reaction that it 
did in its previous context. 


Selection against the mean 


Evolution Patterns in a Narrative Ecosystem 


Broadening the focus of our analysis to the overall television landscape, 
we will now consider the evolutionary patterns of TV shows considered 
as part of media markets and niches (Dimmick 2002). According to this 
perspective, we have observed that there are two models of evolution that 
can be applied to narrative ecosystems. 


— Convergent evolution refers to different species that, though inhabit- 
ing different niches and remaining fundamentally different from one 
another, become more similar in structure and function over time. 
In the television industry, this kind of evolution accounts for the 
contemporary trend of duplication: given different markets based 
on different kind of production and targets, producers tend to align 
their programming in order to carve up the majority-taste audience 
(Doyle 2002). This evolution process is enacted by the exploitation 
of specific properties that could be profitable. Most recently, for 
instance, the trend of shows dealing with supernatural subjects has 
proven to be pervasive in the US TV environment, from broadcast 
television (e.g. Supernatural, Grimm, The Vampire Diaries) to basic 
and premium cable (Teen Wolf, Bitten, True Blood). This evolution 


176 WORLD BUILDING 


process makes genres that are apparently distant from one another 
converge into a single product. It is the case of Grimm, which is basi- 
cally a procedural/cop-drama, and of Teen Wolf, which is basically 
a teen drama. Both shows become aligned through a boosting of 
particular features and through the hybridization of genres, thus 
appealing to a broader audience. Though these series maintain dif- 
ferent basic features related to the productive background to which 
they belong (FCC regulation, business models, target audience, etc.), 
they nevertheless tend to align with each other over time, replicating 
the most successful trends—for instance, the stress on both romantic 
and horror situations. 


— Divergent evolution occurs whenever, within the same ecological niche 
and species, diversity arises. In our case, we can see how a broadcaster 
operating within one particular market tends to diversify its offer in 
order to cover all of its possible subsets. For instance, The CW was 
created by CBS and Time Warner in order to provide a channel that 
was strongly oriented to a teen audience. At its inception, the channel’s 
focus was mainly on teen drama (Gilmore Girls, 7th Heaven), but now 
it offers a wide variety of programming, ranging from science fiction 
(The Tomorrow People, The 100) to drama/romance (Gossip Girl, The 
Carrie Diaries) and supernatural (The Vampire Diaries, The Originals). 
The channel's programming maintains a strong teenage-oriented 
profile; nevertheless, it has evolved through a diversification enacted 
by stressing both genres and hybridization. 


Conclusions 


This chapter has sought, first of all, to offer evidence of some limits of the 
traditional approaches to the study of TV serial narratives—for instance, 
those derived from the semiotic and narratological tradition—and to pro- 
pose an alternative approach to these complex productions. Serialization 
configures a composite environment that we defined as an ecosystem, 
with the ability to spread and change in space and time. With such a 
perspective, the single element of a series (the weekly episode) works as 
an interface, an entry point to the whole, complex environment in which 
the whole narrative universe of the series is included. As a consequence, 
it is necessary to hybridize the tools that are traditionally adopted within 
the field of media studies with others that are more suited to face complex 


NARRATIVE ECOSYSTEMS 177 


phenomena, and, thus, to provide an accurate analysis of environments 
and ecosystems instead of isolated artifacts. Thus, what we have tried to do 
is to direct our attention to disciplines that are adjacent to media studies, 
such as information architecture, but also to draw on notions derived from 
ecology and natural sciences. 

In particular, we think that a fundamental principle is that of resilience, 
that is to say, the capacity of a system to adapt to changes while reacting 
in order to re-establish its equilibrium. Resilience offers a crucial key 
not only for understanding the design of convergent systems but also for 
defining their economic value. In such ecosystems, value shifts from the 
single artifact (a single text) to the larger totality (the entire ecosystem). 
That means, in turn, that it is preferable to sacrifice local details and 
local precision for a better global experience than vice versa. The experi- 
ence of such ecosystems is a process and a transit across time and space; 
thus, the more the system allows both users and producers to shape and 
re-shape the ecosystem itself, with potentially infinite variations, the 
more it will be capable to grow and spread. The top-down, hierarchical 
models of the broadcasting industry are therefore inadequate approaches 
to media ecosystems, because they treat each channel separately. As 
ecosystems are not just a sum of items (products, channels, times of 
distributions), both the design and the value processes should embrace 
a global perspective. 

Some phenomena very similar to serial narration and media convergence 
are now taking place in many other fields, such as industrial design, services 
design, and marketing. It is therefore desirable to promote a joint study 
of these phenomena at the intersection of the various fields of analysis: 
we need meta-models that are able to explain a convergence process that 
(even with some diverse nuances) affects many of our everyday experiences 
transversally. 

What we have so far outlined is a theoretical framework that accounts 
for certain processes and changes in narrative ecosystems by drawing on 
ecological selection and evolution. It is a qualitative examination that points 
out some possible developmental directions and carries a heuristic value 
and predictive possibilities. Although characters are just one element of the 
overall ecosystem, we decided to focus here on this specific element. This 
choice can be considered an acceptable simplification, in that it highlights 
processes related to modifying agents (the characters can actually alter the 
narrative). There are evidently several other elements within the ecosystem 
that could be taken into consideration; for instance, a study on audience 
taste would be as relevant as a study of characters. 


178 WORLD BUILDING 


In the case of natural ecosystems, the selection and evolution processes 
concern populations, which represent statistically significant numbers of 
individuals sharing the same traits. For this reason, it is relatively simple 
to elaborate and to evaluate these processes in statistical terms. In the 
case of narrative ecosystems, on the other hand, selection and evolution 
concern a substantially limited number of individuals that are usually 
extremely different from one another and may not share the same traits 
whatsoever. In other words, each series, group of characters, or even a 
single character can represent a population on its own. This implies that 
a statistical analysis of the process might not work properly, because we 
have to deal with a group of individuals who are extremely heterogeneous 
and cannot be assimilated from an analytical point of view. 

We should also keep in mind that, in the case of TV series, we are deal- 
ing with artificial selection and evolution: as we have seen, the changes 
are production-driven and are mainly based on interpretations of the 
selective pressure exerted by the environment. Therefore, the producers 
make choices based on available data, trying to maximize the efficiency 
of the series (i.e. its fitness within its environment). However, efficiency 
is not the only parameter to take into consideration. In fact, as we have 
seen, to increase efficiency might result in a lack of balance, a decrease 
of the resilience of the system, as well as a deterioration of its dynamic 
abilities. 

For all these reasons, we deem it necessary to elaborate individual-based 
or action-based models that account for the behaviors of a single element 
of the system and that, combined with significant data concerning the 
narrative ecosystem itself (ratings, panels, surveys, etc.), ultimately allow 
us to evaluate their outcomes. A viable model should, on the one hand, be 
able to improve the quantity and quality of data. On the other, it should 
offer “What ifs,” that is to say, simulations in relation to possible choices 
(for instance, what might happen to the ratings if the producers make the 
two leading characters break up?).* 

Given that we consider TV series a social group (made up of characters 
and situations), part of the work that we are currently carrying out concerns 
keeping up with study of those characters. Though we can adopt social 
research tools in order to study this social group, we cannot apply some 
qualitative and quantitative methods since we are not able, for instance, to 
interview the characters. Thus, what we are trying to do now is to consider 
the social relations among characters through the methods offered by social 
network analysis; methods that, unlike other models of analysis, do not need 
direct interactions with the subjects.° We expect to obtain a reconstruction 


NARRATIVE ECOSYSTEMS 179 


of the social relations between characters, in order to understand the vari- 
ous positions they occupy, as well as their various degrees of relevance in 
the narrative ecosystem’s organization. By basing our assumptions on the 
analysis of the interactions of characters, we are attempting to understand 
the properties of the social network (centrality, betweenness, closeness, 
etc.) as a basis for making forecasts on series development. 

What we have ultimately tried to underline in this chapter is that media 
products are not “statements” or “texts” anymore: they are artifacts that, like 
many others, inhabit our world, furnishing and extending it in unpredict- 
able directions according to a cumulative logic. As soon as we recognize 
that some media productions can be considered proper ecosystems, then 
our entire experience of the surrounding reality that is affected by this 
change. Nowadays, we are dealing with a composite and complex reality, 
rather than with a naturalized, iconic, and reproductive one, in which 
media images and the information flow become tools for everyday life and 
a relevant part of our life experience. 


Notes 


1. This article is the result of joint and collaborative work that the two authors 
have been undertaking since 2010. It is also partially based on two articles 
Pescatore, Innocenti 2012 and Pescatore, Innocenti, Brembilla 2014. 

2. On this matter, see Ryan in this book and especially the paragraph titled 
Narrative Proliferation, in which Ryan explains how in the same narrative 
world many different stories can live together and be told about that world. 
Stories are subject to fragmentation, divided into many elements and, in the 
specific case Ryan analyses, fragments “tend to become shorter and shorter 
[...], are presented in a seemingly random order.” 

3- The concept is used in film studies (Wyatt 1994). We applied the idea of 
high concept to TV series in our book (2008). 

4. Recently, we have witnessed relevant changes in this matter. For instance, 
the debate on binge-watching exploded when Netflix started releasing 
episodes of its serial programming simultaneously. See, among others: 
Poniewozik 2012; Pagels 2012; West 2014. 

5. See, for instance: a section of the website Italiansubs.net, specifically 
dedicated to this topic: http://www.italiansubs.net/forum/greys-anatomy/ 
totomorto-season-11/. 

6. The concepts of consistency and resilience applied to TV series have been 
explored in Innocenti, Pescatore, and Rosati (forthcoming). 

7- Our approach has proven to be quite effective in the analysis of TV serial 
products. Since 2010, when we first proposed the definition of narrative 


180 WORLD BUILDING 


ecosystems and started our work in this field, we have organized two inter- 
national conferences dedicated to this topic (Media Mutations 3. Narrative 
ecosystems: environment, tools and models, Bologna, 24-25 May 2011 and 
Media Mutations 4. Narrative ecosystems: flows, transformations, social uses, 
Bologna, 22-23 May 2012); we have edited a book collection and we have 
published several papers on national and international peer-reviewed 
journals. 

8. Aninteresting approach that has some similarities with our reflections is 
included in Moretti, who makes “a little attempt at quantitative stylistics, 
examining some strategies by which titles point to specific genres” (2009, 
136). Moretti’s attempt is interesting to us since it seems to remark the ne- 
cessity of implementing quantitative methods and computational tools for 
the humanities and, in particular, in the fields of film and television studies. 

g. This work is carried out through the use of the software Ucinet. 


Works cited 


Bisoni, Claudio; and Innocenti, Veronica (eds.). 2013. Media mutations. Gli ecosis- 
temi narrativi nello scenario mediale contemporaneo: spazi, modelli, usi sociali. 
Modena: Mucchi. 

Carini, Stefania. 2010. Il testo espanso. Il telefilm nell'età della convergenza. Milano: 
Vita e Pensiero. 

Casetti, Francesco. 2015. The Lumière Galaxy: Seven Keywords for the Cinema to 
Come. New York: Columbia University Press. 

Clarke, M.J. 2013. Transmedia Television: New Trends in Network Serial Production. 
NY-London: Bloomsbury Academic. 

Dimmick, John W. 2002. Media Competition and Coexistence: The Theory of the 
Niche. London: Taylor and Francis. 

Doyle, Gillian. 2002. Understanding Media Economics. London: Sage Publications. 

Evans, Elizabeth. 2011. Transmedia Television: Audiences, New Media and Daily 
Life. NY: Routledge. 

Ferguson, Douglas A. 2008. “The Broadcast Television Networks.” In: Media Econom- 
ics: Theory and Practice, edited by Alison Alexander, James Owers, and Rod 
Carveth, 156-160. Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence. 

Harrigan, Pat; and Wardrip-Fruin, Noah (eds.). 2009. Third Person: Authoring and 
Exploring Vast Narratives. Cambridge MA: MIT Press. 

Hilmes, Michele. 2013. Only Connect: A Cultural History of Broadcasting in the United 
States. Belmont: Wadsworth Press. 

Innocenti, Veronica; and Pescatore, Guglielmo. 2008. Le nuove forme della serialita 


televisiva. Storia, linguaggio, temi. Bologna: Archetipolibri. 


NARRATIVE ECOSYSTEMS 181 


Innocenti, Veronica and Pescatore, Guglielmo. 2012. “Information Architecture 
in Contemporary Television Series.” Journal of Information Architecture, 1.2. 
Accessed June 2016. Available at http://journalofia.org/volume4/issue2/05- 
pescatore/. 

Innocenti, Veronica; Pescatore, Guglielmo; and Rosati, Luca. 2016. “Converging 
universes and media niches in serial narratives. An approach through informa- 
tion architecture.” In: Media Convergence Handbook—Volume II Firms and User 
Perspectives, edited by Artur Lugmayr and Cinzia Dal Zotto, 137-153. Springer 
Verlag. 

Jenkins, Henry. 2006. Convergence Culture: Where Old and New Media Collide. New 
York: New York University Press. 

Jenkins, Henry. 2009. “Revenge of the Origami Unicorn: The Remaining Four 
Principles of Transmedia Storytelling.” henryjenkins.org, 12 December. Accessed 
June 16. Available at http://henryjenkins.org/2009/12/the_revenge_of_the_ori- 
gami_uni.html. 

Johnson, Derek. 2013. Media Franchising. Creative License and Collaboration in the 
Culture Industries. New York: NYU Press. 

Moretti, Franco. 2009. “Style Inc. Reflections on Seven Thousand Titles (British 
Novels, 1740-1850).” Critical Inquiry, 1. 

Pagels, Jim. 2012. “Stop Binge-Watching TV.” Slate, 9 July, available at http://www. 
slate.com/blogs/browbeat/2012/07/09/binge_watching_tv_why_you_need_to 


stop_-.html. 

Pescatore, Guglielmo; Innocenti, Veronica; and Brembilla, Paola. 2014. “Selection 
and evolution in narrative ecosystems. A theoretical framework for narrative 
prediction.” Multimedia and Expo Workshops (ICMEW), IEEE International 
Conference, 14-18 July. 

Poniewozik, James. 2012. “Go Ahead, Binge-Watch That TV Show.” Time, 10 July, 
available at http://entertainment.time.com/2012/07/10/go-ahead-binge-watch- 
that-tv-show/. 

Resmini, Andrea; and Rosati, Luca. 2011. Pervasive Information Architecture. 
Burlington: Morgan Kaufmann. 

Smith, Thomas M.; and Smith, Robert L. 2003. Elements of Ecology. San Francisco: 
Cummings. 

Ulin, Jeffrey C. 2010. The Business of Media Distribution. Oxford: Elsevier. 

West, Kelly. 2014. “Unsurprising: Netflix Survey Indicates People Like to Binge- 
Watch TV.” Cinema Blend, January, available at http://www.cinemablend.com/ 
television/Unsurprising-Netflix-Survey-Indicates-People-Like-Binge-Watch- 
TV-61045.html. 

Wyatt, Justin. 1994. High Concept: Movies and Marketing in Hollywood. Austin: 
University of Texas Press. 


182 WORLD BUILDING 
Media Cited 


7th Heaven. The WB 1996-2006 and The CW 2006-2007. 
Angel. The WB 1999-2004. 

Arrested Development. Fox 2003-2006 and Netflix 2013-present. 
Bitten, Space 2014-2016. 

Buffy the Vampire Slayer. The WB 1997-2001 and UPN 2001-2003. 
Doctor Who. BBC 1963-1989 and 2005-present. 

E.R. NBC 1994-2009. 

Gilmore Girls. The WB 2000-2006 and The CW 2006-2007. 
Gossip Girl. The CW 2007-2012. 

Grimm. NBC 2011-present. 

Heroes. NBC 2006-2010. 

House MD. Fox, 2004-2012. 

Lost. ABC, 2004-2010. 

Supernatural. The WB 2005-2006 and The CW 2006-present. 
Teen Wolf. MTV 2011-present. 

The 100. The CW 2014-present. 

The Carrie Diaries. The CW 2013-2014. 

The Killing. AMC 2011-2013 and Netflix 2014 

The Originals. The CW 2013-present. 

The Tomorrow People. The CW 2013-2014. 

The Vampire Diaries. The CW 2009-present. 

The Walking Dead. AMC 2010-present. 

True Blood. HBO 2008-2014. 


About the author 


Veronica Innocenti is assistant professor at the University of Bologna, 
where she teaches History of Broadcasting and Film Marketing. She 
holds a Ph.D in Film Studies from University of Bologna. She has been 
a speaker to several national and international conferences and the 
organizer of the conference Media Mutations 3 and 4, dedicated to 
narrative ecosystems (www .mediamutations .org). She is the author 
of several books, edited collections and essays. Among others: Le nuove 
forme della serialita televisiva. Storia, linguaggio, temi (Archetipo 2008, 
with Guglielmo Pescatore); Factual, reality, makeover. Lo spettacolo della 
trasformazione nella televisione contemporanea (Bulzoni 2013, co-edited 
with Marta Perrotta) and Media Mutations. Gli ecosistemi narrativi nello 


NARRATIVE ECOSYSTEMS 183 


scenario mediale contemporaneo. Spazi, modelli, usi sociali (Mucchi 2013, 
co-edited with Claudio Bisoni). 


Guglielmo Pescatore is full professor at the University of Bologna, where 
he teaches courses on Film and Media Semiotics as well as Theory and 
Techniques of New Media at the University of Bologna. His work has been 
focused for a long time on avant-garde and experimental cinema, topics on 
which he wrote several articles and essays published in journals and edited 
collections. Nowadays, his main interest is on the impact of digital media 
on audiovisual communication, especially on new forms of authorship and 
new modes of fruition. He is the author of the books L'ombra dell'autore. 
Teoria e storia dell‘autore cinematografico (Carocci 2006), Le nuove forme 
della serialita televisiva (Archetipo 2008, with Veronica Innocenti) and the 
editor of the collection of essays Matrix. Uno studio di caso (Hybris 2006). 
He has been the coordinator of the Ph.D program in Visual, Performative 
and Media Arts of the University of Bologna until 2016 and is now President 
of the University of Bologna Libraries. 


Section 3 


Immersion 


10. The Building and Blurring of Worlds 


Sound, Space, and Complex Narrative Cinema 


Justin Horton 


Boni, Marta (ed.), World Building. Transmedia, Fans, Industries. Amster- 
dam University Press, 2017 


DOI: 10.5117/9789089647566/CH10 


Abstract 

Sound plays a crucial role in the construction of cinematic worlds by 
evoking spaces beyond the edges of the frame. In this essay, I examine 
the relationship between sound and image as it relates to offscreen space 
in more or less conventional narratives before turning my attention to a 
complex example, Christopher Nolan’s Inception (2010). Rather than one 
cinematic world, this film offers us as many as five, and sound—both at 
a formal and a narrative level—mediates them all. I demonstrate how 
the sound design in Inception not only helps to build its cinematic worlds 
but also to blur the boundaries between them. 


Keywords: Sound; Cinematic Space; Puzzle Films; Narrative Complexity; 


Inception 


There has been, in recent years, a pronounced shift within Media Studies 
away from the more time-honored concerns of plot, character, and action 
and towards “world,” reflecting a number of intersecting factors, among 
them, the increasing prevalence of transmedial narratives that feature 
a common universe but that “unfold across multiple media platforms” 
(Jenkins 2006, 334); the renewed popularity of science-fiction and fantasy, 
genres often noted for vast imaginary worlds and intricate mythologies 
(Thompson 2008); and the impact of computers on how we engage with 
and understand narratives and media alike (Murray 1998; Kinder 2002; 
Manovich 2002; Bordwell 2006; Cameron 2008). Whereas stories tend to- 
ward narrative economy by offering only information that is crucial to the 
plot, worlds brim over with textual detail that contributes a verisimilitude 


188 WORLD BUILDING 


that “absorbs” or “immerses” the reader, gamer, or viewer in them (Wolf 
2012). 

But what does a world sound like, and what role, if any, does sound play 
in its construction? Sound, like “world,” cuts across genre and medium, 
turning up in a diverse array of forms both new and old, from radio and 
television to video games and new media art installations. This remarkable 
heterogeneity of sound in media, however, prohibits a thorough considera- 
tion of its various incarnations in the space of a single essay. Therefore, in 
what follows, I will limit my focus to the context of film and how sound 
contributes, in ways that often escape notice, to the spectator’s mental 
representation of imaginary worlds and, often, to her seeming “integration” 
or “immersion” into them. Sound is especially well suited to this latter 
point, as Frances Dyson notes: 


[S]ound is the immersive medium par excellence. Three-dimensional, in- 
teractive, and synesthetic, perceived in the here and now ofan embodied 
space, sound returns to the listener the very same qualities that media 
mediates: that feeling of being here and now, of experiencing oneself 
as engulfed, enveloped, absorbed, enmeshed, in short, immersed in an 
environment. (Dyson 2009, 4) 


But our mapping and immersion in cinematic space through sound is 
generally a function of hearing sounds that belongs to the world of the 
film. What are we to make, then, of music, noises, and speech that seem 
to hover around the screen, at a remove from the onscreen world? Such 
indeterminate sounds tend to evade the intellect or cast doubt on one’s 
visual certainty: after all, seeing is believing, as the saying goes. 

In this chapter, I will consider first the ways in which sound aids in the 
construction of worlds in the minds of spectators, especially its evocation 
of offscreen space, which suggests parts of the world that lie outside the 
frame of our immediate visual apprehension. Second, I turn my attention 
to surround-sound technologies and how they “place” the spectator in the 
film world by collapsing the distance between it and the movie theater or 
one’s living room. Lastly, in the essay’s final third, I offer a brief analysis 
of Inception (Nolan 2010), a “complex” film that explicitly thematizes the 
processes of world building and that integrates sound in intriguing ways 
into its elaborate plot machinations. That is to say, Inception creates not 
simply a world, but worlds—plural—, using sound as a conduit between 
them. 


THE BUILDING AND BLURRING OF WORLDS 189 


Scenographic Space and the Mental Construction of Cinematic 
Worlds 


How does the cinema construct and then place a viewer in its world? Most 
commercial fiction filmmaking around the globe is modelled, at least in 
part, on the Hollywood system of continuity, which first organizes and edits 
disparate shots together to create the suggestion of seamless space and time, 
while carefully prompting the spectator to make certain inferences and 
hypotheses about this cinematic world. As David Bordwell, Janet Staiger, 
and Kristin Thompson explain, cinematic continuity is a representational 
system based on various perspectival traditions as well as a narrational 
system. The continuity system, they explain, “turns a remarkably coherent 
spatial system into the vehicle for narrative causality” as “the viewer [...] 
meets the film halfway and completes the illusion of seeing an integral 
fictional space” (Bordwell, Staiger, and Thompson 1985, 59). According to 
their study, this system was standardized by 1917, more than a decade before 
the coming of synchronized sound. Therefore, for the time being, we shall 
look to how films build worlds visually before turning our attention to sound 
and how it complements and, at times, complicates the seeming coherence 
of cinematic worlds. 

At its core, the Hollywood-style system of continuity is a set of devices 
that, when combined, unify scenographic space and time while simultane- 
ously effacing the evidence of its own constructedness— covering its own 
tracks, if you will. The result is a highly contrived yet seemingly natural 
presentation “organized for the spectator” who is “[kept] [...] at the center 
of every image” (Andrew 1976, 147). One such device is the establishing shot, 
which, in many ways, anchors the entire system. An establishing shot is a 
long or medium-long shot that, as the name implies, establishes the locale of 
the scene and, most often, the position of characters relative to one another 
within it. From this base shot, filmmakers may “cut in” to closer framings. 

Two principles guide these cuts: the first, which relates to a film's narra- 
tive logic, is motivation; that is, the closer shot reveals some aspect of the 
scene that is pertinent to the story and that might not be readily apparent 
from the wider view. The second principle is what is broadly known as 
“matching.” One such type is the “match-on-action,” wherein a movement 
begun in one shot is continued in the next shot, reassuring viewers that 
both shots are continuous with one another and that, even though there 
has been a visual cut, the time and place remain consistent. The human eye 
tends to gravitate towards motion, and this perceptual predilection works 
to “hide” the cut. Another common matching convention is the “eyeline 


190 WORLD BUILDING 


match,” wherein we see a character glance over to something offscreen and 
then, in the subsequent shot, we see what she sees (though most commonly 
not from her “optical point of view”). Crucially, the space revealed may be of 
something present in the establishing shot or of a bordering space that the 
viewer has not yet seen. Extending the logic of the eyeline match is the shot/ 
reverse shot, in which the viewpoint alternates between two figures. In each 
case, the changes in angle are not random; rather, they are motivated by a 
character’s look. These devices incrementally reveal parts of the imaginary 
world of the film (its “diegesis”), but only in a fragmentary way.’ 

The viewer’s task is to take these partial views and reconstruct them into 
an abstract mental image, a “cognitive map,” of a unified whole. But there are 
other ways in which films visually suggest spaces that are never shown directly. 
Noël Burch argues that there are, in fact, two distinct types of cinematic space: 
that which is in the frame—what he calls “concrete space”— and that which 
is outside it or “imaginary”. Doorways, for example, are a common means 
by which imaginary space is suggested beyond the concrete. If a character 
enters or exits a scene via a door situated on either side of the frame, then it 
follows that the filmic world stretches beyond that which is currently visible 
(Burch 1981, 17). Such an evocation of space is put to remarkably effective 
use in Fritz Lang’s M (1931). In its first sequence, we see young Elsie (Inge 
Landgut) bouncing a ball when she encounters Hans Beckert (Peter Lorre), a 
child serial killer who lures the young girl into his clutches with the purchase 
of a balloon. In one shot, we see Elsie and Beckert together before they exit 
the frame. Moments later, the film’s construction implies the girl's death in 
two consecutive shots: first, at a previously unseen wooded location, the ball 
that belonged to Elsie rolls into the frame from offscreen right; and second, a 
shot of the balloon hung in the lattice of power lines before the wind carries 
it away and out of the frame to the left. The movements of objects associated 
with Elsie into and out of the frame here imply not only a larger world than 
what the screen can contain, but also, poignantly, a movement from visibility 
to invisibility, presence to absence, and life to death. 

It bears repeating that each of the aforementioned approaches to off- 
screen space is conveyed visually. The question that remains is how film 
sound accomplishes a similar task. Evoking offscreen space, however, was 
not the first impulse for filmmakers early in the transition era. Rather, 
dialogue, even more than music and noises, ruled the day. After all, the 
silent cinema was never, in fact, silent, as it was often accompanied by 
live music, narrators, and sound effects produced in the auditorium itself 
(Altman 2004, 193-194). This is why synce-sound films came to be known as 
“talkies” rather than, say, “soundies.” 


THE BUILDING AND BLURRING OF WORLDS 191 


But the introduction of dialogue inaugurated its own set of challenges. 
First, was the concern over always visualizing the speaker, for to hear a voice 
absent a visualized source has been, throughout history, a source of a certain 
anxiety. The “disembodied voice’, as it is often called, is frequently aligned 
with the supernatural or otherworldly, from the voice of god to ghostly 
hauntings (Chion 1999, 23-26; Connor 2000, 410; Kane 2014, 150). Thus, early 
in the transition era, practitioners felt compelled to pair the sound ofa voice 
with an image of the speaker's moving lips. Secondly, this practice was 
abetted by the technological limitations such as microphones of limited 
range and cameras housed in heavy soundproof booths that masked their 
noisy operation. Combined, these two tendencies worked to constrain both 
the movement of actors and the ability to cut within the scene. 

Over time, filmmakers discovered that audiences were far more 
adaptable to the interplay of sound and image that they might have 
initially assumed, and recording technology (and technician ingenuity) 
soon overcame these initial limitations. The lesson: sound and image, 
though synchronized, need not necessarily be “redundant”: the image is 
not duty-bound to show what the soundtrack says, and vice versa. Film- 
makers thus began to exploit offscreen sounds to their advantage. One 
crucial innovation was the “voice-off,” wherein a character not seen in the 
shot can nevertheless be heard. Thus, much like the eyeline match with 
unseen objects or characters, the voice-off convention depends on viewer 
inferences about areas offscreen. Take the first few shots of Erin Brockovich 
(Soderbergh, 2000), wherein sound precedes the images by several seconds. 
Over a black screen, we hear a male voice pose a question to a female who 
answers back. When the image appears, we see only the titular character 
(Julia Roberts). One infers quickly that the situation is a job interview, but, 
for nearly the first minute of the film, the interviewer goes unseen, his voice 
and the movement of his arms in the bottom left corner of the screen are 
all that indicate his presence and the as-yet unrevealed remainder of the 
office. Here, sound provides a larger degree of spatial information about 
the film’s world than does the image. Such is the power of the voice-off, a 
device that Mary Ann Doane argues 


deepens the diegesis, gives it an extent which exceeds that of the image, 
and thus supports the claim that there is space in the fictional world 
which the camera does not register. [...] The voice-off is a sound which 
is first and foremost in the service of the film’s construction of space 
and only indirectly in the service of the image. It validates both what 
the screen reveals of the diegesis and what it conceals. (Doane 1980, 40) 


192 WORLD BUILDING 


Per Doane, the voice-off is as much a matter of spatial construction as it 
is of anxiety over bodily coherence. But Doane’s theorization makes the 
aural building of the diegetic world entirely a function of voice, neglecting 
music and noise, a position that reflects what Michel Chion calls “voco- 
and verbocentrism’” (Chion 1994, 4), his terms for the tendency of critics, 
filmmakers, scholars, and viewers to privilege speech over and above other 
aspects of film sound. Chion provides a counterexample: during interior 
scenes in The Sacrifice (Tarkovsky, 1986), birds outside are continuously 
heard despite them never being visualized or otherwise discussed by the 
characters. These “territory sounds’, as he calls them, suggest unrepresented 
exterior spaces at the same time that they “fill in” or enrich the image 
with hints of a fully realized world (Chion, 1994, 124). A more narratively 
pertinent example can be found in the aforementioned M, when Beckert 
realizes he is at risk through hearing the sound of sirens in the distance. 
In a sound film, the converging police needn't necessarily be shown, but 
are merely suggested. 

A guiding assumption to this point has been that the sounds we hear 
while watching a film are diegetic, that they are in and of the onscreen 
world. This is not always the case, however. We will consider nondiegetic 
sound in a later section. In the meantime, we shall turn away from how 
sound aids in the viewer’s mental construction of space to how it seemingly 
places her in the filmic world. 


Sound Technology and Immersion 


In many cases, film sound not only suggests a world but also immerses us 
in it. But in order to understand how, we must first attend briefly to the 
history of film sound technology. With few exceptions, from the 1920s to 
well into the 1970s, sync-sound films were presented monophonically, 
with the sound issuing from a single loudspeaker (or “channel”) placed 
behind the screen at its horizontal center (Kerins 2010, 329). Within the 
representational logic of the cinema, even if a sound occurs offscreen—a 
gunshot, say—, in mono presentation it actually reaches the viewer from 
straight on. No matter from where the sound is implied to originate within 
the film world, it always emits from the screen. The viewer therefore must 
ignore this incongruity in order to make the cinematic illusion cohere. 
Our mental representation of space is thus flexible enough to account for 
the disparity, willfully ignoring it so as to ensure the consistency of the 
imaginary space (Altman 1980, 71). 


THE BUILDING AND BLURRING OF WORLDS 193 


Dolby Stereo, which was introduced in the mid-1970s, quickly supplanted 
mono as the standard for the film sound for over two decades and utilized 
four distinct channels: three (left, center, right) at the screen and one “sur- 
round” loudspeaker situated away from the screen. The result, according 
to Chion, was that “The space of the film [was] no longer confined to the 
screen [and] became the entire auditorium’—what he calls the “superfield” 
(Chion 1994, 151). This development is a crucial one, for it makes manifest 
“a reversal of cinematic hierarchy”: 


where historically it has been the responsibility of the image to explain 
the soundtrack by visually confirming the sources of sounds, it is not 
the soundtrack that provides the context of the image. [...] Expanding 
beyond the edges of the frame, the sonic world literally becomes bigger 
than the image, which reveals only a small fraction of the [diegetic] 
world. [...] The soundtrack now assumes the task of guiding the audience 
and creating a coherent narrative space. (Kerins 2010, 86, emphasis in 
original) 


According to Chion, the surround channel of Dolby Stereo anchors space 
through the stable presentation of ambient sound, erasing, in many cases, 
the need for an establishing shot. 

Mark Kerins argues, though, that the superfield is less apt a characteriza- 
tion of Digital Surround Sound (DSS), which grew to prominence in the 
1990s. Though there are several proprietary loudspeaker configurations 
with DSS, they all share, at minimum, what is called a 5.1 arrangement: 
three front channels (left, center, right), two surround channels (left and 
right), and a low-frequency channel that operates at one-tenth the range 
of the other loudspeakers (thus the .1) and that is responsible for producing 
bass-y, low-end notes that often are palpably felt as much as heard, eliciting 
“the very physical sensation of being at an earth-shaking event” (ibid, 330, 
134, emphasis in original). Kerins modifies Chion’s term with his own—the 
“ultrafield’—that accounts for the tendency of DSS sound designers to 
“constantly shift sounds around the multi-channel environment”. The 
ultrafield, writes Kerins, 


seeks not to provide a continuous aural environment, but rather to 
continuously provide an accurate spatial environment where aural and 
visual space match. In short, the ultrafield is the three-dimensional sonic 
environment of the digital world, continuously reoriented to match the 
camera’s visual perspective.’ (ibid, 92, emphasis in original) 


194 WORLD BUILDING 


When we speak of “immersion” and cinema, we have to account not simply 
for the world it presents visually but also sonically. Moreover, we must also 
be attentive to the technologies used to design and exhibit a particular 
film. That is to say, the degree or kind of aural immersion on offer in Tim 
Burton’s Batman (1989), a movie from the Dolby Stereo era, is quite different 
from a DSS-era film like Taken (Morel, 2008). Furthermore, we must not 
presume ideal conditions for every viewer: many films still carry a Dolby 
Stereo track in addition to their surround track for theaters that are not 
equipped with cutting-edge sound systems. Similarly, a viewer watching 
a DSS film at home on the puny speakers of a stereo television or through 
earbuds attached to a laptop will not experience the same sort of immersion 
as one in a multiplex environment. The question is thus not so much what 
one hears, but also from where, and in what sort of space. 


The Elsewhere and the Otherworldy: Nondiegetic Sound 


To this point, we have examined the various ways in which films structure 
space first with images, then with sounds. With regard to the latter, however, 
we have largely limited our discussion to sounds ofand in the filmic world. 
But what are we to make of sounds that originate elsewhere? 

Akey distinction must first be drawn between diegetic and nondiegetic 
sounds. Diegetic sounds originate in the world of the film, and they may 
be divided into two categories: external and internal. External diegetic 
sounds belong to the world of the film and are audible to the characters 
within them. In the famous scene in When Harry Met Sally... (Reiner 1989) 
when Sally (Meg Ryan) loudly fakes an orgasm during lunch at a busy New 
York City diner, all parties hear it, to great comedic effect. This contrasts 
with internal diegetic sounds, which might best be thought of as entirely 
interior, heard only “in the head” of a single character (and, of course, the 
viewer). Films with a running interior monologue such as Bridget Jones's 
Diary (Maguire 2001) are built upon this internal diegetic principle. 

In contrast, nondiegetic sounds are heard only by the viewer and not by 
the inhabitants of the film world, and music is perhaps its most immediately 
recognized form. For example, as the Stallone character runs up the steps of 
the Philadelphia Museum of Art at the end of the training montage in Rocky 
(Avildsen 1976), no one would presume that he hears the theme music that 
we do. The song is thus intended “for” the viewer, priming her emotionally 
with its triumphant refrain. Yet the matter of music’s relation to the diegesis 
is not so cut-and-dried, for it frequently slides between these two levels, often 


THE BUILDING AND BLURRING OF WORLDS 195 


unobtrusively. In the conclusion of Richard Linklater’s Dazed and Confused 
(Linklater 1993), for instance, Mitch (Wiley Wiggins) listens to Foghat’s “Slow 
Ride” via headphones, which we initially hear as muddled and thin but that 
gradually grows louder and fuller before carrying over into the next scene, 
which takes place in an entirely different location. The music is no longer 
“sourced” within the world of the film, having become entirely nondiegetic. 

But if this music does not belong to the world of the film, from whence does 
it come? Nondiegetic sound emerges from an uncertain place, a somewhere 
else beyond the film world that exists alongside it, a co-existence of planes, if 
you will. Nondiegetic sounds, then, are not merely “off” (i.e., not visualized), 
but “over,” at aremove from the film’s world, yet seemingly encompassing it. 
A perhaps familiar nondiegetic device is the voiceover, which Sarah Kozloff 
helpfully contrasts with the previously discussed voice-off: 


“Over” actually implies more than mere screen-absence [“voice-off”]; ... 
[V]oice-over is distinguishable by the fact that one could not display the 
speaker by adjusting the camera’s position in the pictured story space; 
instead, the voice comes from another time and space. (Kozloff 1989, 3, 
emphasis in original) 


For Pascal Bonitzer, the voiceover’s elsewhere “represents a power [...] 
from a place which is absolutely other (from that inscribed in the image- 
track)—absolutely other and absolutely undertermined” (Bonitzer 1980, 
133-134, emphasis in original). Bonitzer is here referring to the particular 
case of documentary voiceover, where the unseen, interpreting narrator's 
indeterminacy carries the weight of divine certainty. Yet, with fiction films, 
this is not always the case. Some voiceovers come with a clear narrative 
frame, such as in Stand By Me, where the primary story of young Gordie 
(Will Wheaton) and his friends’ search for the corpse of a missing boy is 
narrated by his adult self (Richard Dreyfuss), whom we see in the film’s 
bookended sections recollecting these same events as he prepares to pen 
his memoir. More complex deployments of the device also exist: famously, 
in Sunset Blvd. (Wilder 1950), a dead man narrates the story of his murder 
from beyond the grave, while in Daughters of the Dust (Dash 1991), a child 
not yet born provides the voiceover. The Thin Red Line (Malick 1998) utilizes 
voiceovers from four characters, and it is even difficult at times to discern 
which is speaking, hence throwing into question exactly how the sentiments 
expressed are to be interpreted (Millington). Moreover, it is hard to tell 
whether what we hear is in fact a voiceover or a momentary lapse into 
internal diegetic sound (i.e. a character's thoughts as they are happening 


196 WORLD BUILDING 


within the time and place of the diegesis). Such is the potentially slippery 
terrain of the voiceover specifically and of nondiegetic sound generally. 

For our purposes, we can say that when it comes to world building, sound 
functions to imply spaces beyond the frame, yes, but also realms beyond the 
primary world Thought of in this way, sound may be deployed in such a 
way as to build not simply a world, but worlds— plural. In fact, filmmakers 
increasingly mine the possibilities of sound to build intricate, multiplicitous 
worlds, especially in the terrain of “complex” narrative cinema, to which 
we now turn our attention. 


Complex Films, Complex Worlds 


We have seen how sound builds worlds in films that more or less fit within 
a classical paradigm: traditional, Aristotelian stories that are organized and 
presented in accord with Hollywood conventions. However, the 1990s saw a 
trend towards narrative complexity in cinema that has since been labelled 
“puzzle films” (Buckland 2009), “mind-game movies” (Elsaesser 2008), or 
“delirium cinema” (Pisters 2012, 40). Said to depart gleefully from classi- 
cal norms of straightforward narrative progression in an effort to perplex 
spectators through an “embrace of nonlinearity, time loops, and fragmented 
spatio-temporal reality [...], [t]hese films are riddled with gaps, deception, 
labyrinthine structures, ambiguity, and overt coincidences” (Buckland 2009, 6). 

An example of such narrative complexity is Inception, a cinematic 
Gordian Knot if ever there was one. What’s most intriguing about the 
film, given the context of the present essay, is that it thematizes in quite 
literal fashion the act of world building. Moreover, sound—both diegetic 
and nondiegetic—plays a critical and polyvalent role within this Baroque 
structure, resulting in a densely layered sound design that mirrors that of 
the film’s nested dream worlds. 

The plot is set in motion when Cobb (Leonardo DiCaprio), an “extractor” 
paid to steal ideas from the minds of sleeping victims through a process he 
calls “shared dreaming”, is hired to do the opposite: to instill an idea into 
someone's mind. Unlike more straightforward dream theft, inception requires 
far greater access to the mark’s subconscious, thereby necessitating not one 
dream world for them to share, but three. The film thus adopts a multi-tiered, 
dream-within-a-dream structure, as Cobb and his team delve deep into the 
mind of their victim, Fischer (Cillian Murphy), to plant the notion for him 
to break apart and sell his dying father’s empire, a move that would benefit 
Saito (Ken Watanabe), who is, not coincidentally, Cobb’s employer. 


THE BUILDING AND BLURRING OF WORLDS 197 


f: 


A EA 


ous 


As mart is 


10.1: A dreamworld Paris folded in on itself in Inception (Warner Bros.) 


In order for this scheme to be successful, each of the dream levels must 
be sufficiently replete with detail and texture so as not to tip off Fischer 
of their falsity. Enter Ariadne (Ellen Page), a brilliant architecture student 
tasked with constructing worlds both rich and plausible that will serve as 
the staging ground for the group’s deception of Fischer. But Ariadne is new 
to the notion of “shared dreaming” and requires direction from Cobb, a 
tutorial that forms one of the film’s most spectacular set pieces. He follows 
Ariadne as she walks through a Paris-set dream world, the first of her own 
design. There, she reimagines not only the topography of the cityscape on 
the fly, with bridges and doors morphing and materializing around her as 
she moves about the imaginary terrain, but also the physical laws by which 
the world operates. For instance, she literally folds Paris upon itself at one 


INCEPTION 


c 7 
Mi 


f 


10.2: A fan-made infographic charting the complex dream-within-a-dream structure of Inception 
(Rick Slusher) 


198 WORLD BUILDING 


point, bending one half of it onto the other. Inception is thus an imaginary 
world that offers a self-referential commentary on the act of world building 
and, indeed, upon its own construction, adding yet another layer to the 
film’s Russian Doll structure. 

As Ariadne investigates the contours of this Paris of her own making, 
she remarks, “I thought the dream space would be all about the visual, 
but it’s more about the feel of it.” This is an astute point, for the entire 
ruse hinges not on the eye, but on the ear and on bodily sensation. That 
is to say, in order to execute a three-tiered dream, the team must rely on 
heavy sedation. The tricky part, however, is waking up. To that end, Yusuf 
(Dileep Rao), a chemist, formulates a powerful tranquilizer that leaves 
“inner ear function unimpaired”. Why the ear? First, the apparatus of the 
inner ear—called in anatomical terms a “labyrinth,” a delicious coincidence 
in the current context of narrative complexity—is a key component of the 
body’s vestibular system, which contributes to one’s sense of balance, spatial 
orientation, and proprioception (one’s sense of one’s own body during move- 
ment). Thus, even when deeply asleep, the dreamers will be susceptible to 
the real-world sensation of falling, activated by fierce jolts or being toppled 
over in a chair—what Cobb and company dub a “kick”. But, in order to 
successfully remove the team from the nested dream world, the kick must 
occur in both the real world and in each dream level. To pull this off, the 
group relies on a piece of music, Edith Piaf’s “Non, Je ne regrette rien” as a 
means of synchronizing the dream worlds and their dilated temporality 
with the real-world kick. Put differently, the multiple kicks are timed to a 
song that, despite the dreamers’ intense sedation, they continue to hear via 
headphones. And the kick does not merely wake the sleeper; it also causes 
the dream world(s) to collapse. Such is the case in the film’s final kick, 
wherein Ariadne falls backwards in the fourth (unplanned) dream level 
before cascading in reverse through each of the other levels, which shatter 
and disassemble with her impact. The ear, therefore, as both an organ for 
hearing and for bodily comportment, is central to the film's nested structure 
and how it makes (and then unmakes) its multiple worlds. 

This nesting, in fact, transpires at the nondiegetic level as well. In a 
revelation that caused quite a stir amongst the film’s fans shortly after 
its release, one perceptive viewer noted that the deep, brass-y leitmotif 
in Hans Zimmer's score actually corresponds to the horn intro of Piaf’s 
tune—what Zimmer described after the fact as his score’s “DNA” (Michaels 
2009, n.p.)—ifslowed down and protracted (Whitehead 2010, n.p.), a clever 
nod to the temporal expansion that occurs at each dream level. This note, 
which shifts between diegetic and nondiegetic in ways that might not be 


THE BUILDING AND BLURRING OF WORLDS 199 


at first apparent, is fundamental not only to the construction of the film’s 
score but is also the means by which its elaborately built worlds are bound 
together.* 

Much of the discourse surrounding narrative worlds has focused on 
immersion as a function of their sheer expansiveness and their abundance 
of textual detail. But, rather than the frequently deployed horizontal spatial 
metaphors of “vastness” and “extensiveness,” I propose that we might 
also think of complexity in terms of verticality. Indeed, this is the very 
architecture of the sound film: an image of a world laid over with sounds 
that correspond to that world, but also nondiegetic sounds suggestive 
of an elsewhere—or multiple elsewheres—that envelops or is layered 
upon the primary world. Indeed, at the level of its narrative construction, 
Inception explicitly tackles the idea of worlds within worlds. But, cunningly, 
so too does its aural design, which traffics in nondiegetic sound’s tendency 
towards indeterminacy and its ability to layer and move among ever more 
worlds. 


Sound: World Bridging as World Building 


The question pondered in this essay—what is the role of sound in the build- 
ing of cinematic worlds?— has demanded a multipronged answer, one 
that touches on film conventions of spatial organization, both visual and 
aural, and the historical development thereof; the role of offscreen space in 
the viewer's mental construction of a coherent imaginary world; and how 
changes in film sound technology complement this cognitive image with an 
immersive, physical experience of this space. However, immersion and the 
aural evocation of offscreen space are most often functions of diegetic sound, 
the sounds in and of the story world. What are we to make of nondiegetic 
sounds that are temporally or spatially separated from the visualized world 
and that its inhabitants cannot hear? In many cases, nondiegetic sound 
bears no “existential” relation to the story world, belonging instead to the 
film’s “discourse.” Yet, in others, it suggests a realm, a time, or a place that 
is affiliated with but distinct from the “primary” world onscreen.Sound 
maintains a privileged connection to these indeterminate spaces, often 
moving subtly into and out of the diegesis, passing between realms. Thus, 
a film need not necessarily go to the lengths Inception does to be “complex,” 
nor does it require a world as vast as Middle-earth, nor must it parcel out 
its narrative across multiple media platforms, for the relations of sound to 
image are sufficiently intricate in and of themselves. 


200 WORLD BUILDING 
Notes 


1. The notion of diegesis originates with Plato and Aristotle and was first im- 
ported into film theory with the “filmology” movement that emerged in the 
19408. See: Souriau, 1951. See also: Introduction. 

2. Several scholars have noted this break with (or modification of) traditional 
continuity editing, especially with regard to action films from the 1990s 
onward, but few apart from Kerins have integrated sound into their account 
of how or why the spatial organization of contemporary cinema has under- 
gone this shift. See: Bordwell, 2002; Stork, 2011; Shaviro, 2010 and 2012. 

3. By sounds of the “primary world”, I mean those that are unambiguously 
sourced within the diegesis and not “over” or “aside” it. Thus, my usage 
differs from Mark J.P. Wolf’s notion of “Primary World” as the physical 
surroundings of the viewer, reader, or gamer that tend to be “displaced” by 
the secondary, imaginary world when she is “absorbed” in a narrative. See: 
Wolf’s essay elsewhere in this collection. 

4. This is, of course, not the only extratextual reference to Piaf in the film, as 
Cobb’s wife is played by Marion Cotillard, who in fact played Piaf in 2007’s 
La Vie en Rose (Dahan). 


Works Cited 


Altman, Rick. 2004. Silent Film Sound. New York: Columbia University Press. 

—. 1980. “Moving Lips: Cinema as Ventriloquism.” Yale French Studies 60: 67-79. 

Andrew, Dudley. 1976. The Major Film Theories: An Introduction. Oxford: Oxford 
University Press. 

Bordwell, David. “Intensified Continuity: Visual Style in Contemporary American 
Film.” Film Quarterly 55, no. 3: 16-28. 

—. 2006. “Subjective Stories and Networked Narratives.” In: The Way Hollywood 
Tells It: Story and Style in Modern Movies, 72-103. Berkeley: University of Cali- 
fornia Press. 

Bordwell, David; Staiger, Janet; and Thompson, Kristin. 1985. The Classical Hol- 
lywood Cinema: Film Style and Mode of Production to 1960. New York: Columbia 
University Press. 

Buckland, Warren. 2009. “Introduction: Puzzle Plots.” In: Puzzle Films: Complex 
Storytelling in Contemporary Cinema, 1-12. Malden, MA: Wiley-Blackwell. 

Burch, Noél. 1981. Theory of Film Practice. Translated by Helen R. Lane. Princeton, 
NJ: Princeton University Press. 

Cameron, Allan. 2008. Modular Narratives in Contemporary Cinema. New York: 
Palgrave-Macmillan. 


THE BUILDING AND BLURRING OF WORLDS 201 


Chion, Michel. 1994. Audio-Vision: Sound on Screen. Translated by Claudia Gorb- 
man. New York: Columbia University Press. 

—.1999. The Voice in Cinema. Translated by Claudia Gorbman. New York: Columbia 
University Press. 

Connor, Steven. 2000. Dumbstruck: A Cultural History of Ventriloquism. Oxford: 
Oxford University Press. 

Doane, Mary Ann. 1980. “The Voice in the Cinema: The Articulation of Body and 
Space.” Yale French Studies 60: 33-50. 

Dyson, Frances. 2009. Sounding New Media: Immersion and Embodiment in the 
Arts and Culture. Berkeley: University of California Press. 

Elsaesser, Thomas. 2008. “The Mind-Game Film.” In: Puzzle Films: Complex Story- 
telling in Contemporary Cinema, 13-41. Malden, MA: Wiley-Blackwell. 

Jenkins, Henry. 2006. Convergence Culture: Where Old and New Media Collide. New 
York: NYU Press. 

Kane, Brian. 2014. Sound Unseen: Acousmatic Sound in Theory and Practice. Oxford: 
Oxford University Press. 

Kerins, Mark. 2010. Beyond Dolby (Stereo): Cinema in the Digital Sound Age. Bloom- 
ington, IN: Indiana University Press. 

Kinder, Marsha. “Hot Spots, Avatars, and Narrative Fields Forever: Bufiuel’s Legacy 
for New Digital Media and Interactive Database Narrative.” Film Quarterly 55, 
no. 4: 2-15. 

Kozloff, Sarah. 1989. Invisible Storytellers: Voice-over Narration in American Fiction 
Film. Berkeley: University of California Press. 

Manovich, Lev. 2002. The Language of New Media. Cambridge, MA: The MIT Press. 

Michaels, Sean. 2009. “Inception Soundtrack Created Entirely from Edith Piaf.” 
The Guardian, July 29. http://www.theguardian.com/music/2010/jul/29/ 
inception-soundtrack-edith-piaf. 

Millington, Jeremy. 2010. “Critical Voices: Points of View in and on The Thin Red 
Line.” CineAction 81: 28-35. 

Murray, Janet. 1998. Hamlet on the Holodeck: The Future of Narrative in Cyberspace. 
Cambridge, MA: The MIT Press. 

Pisters, Patricia. 2012. The Neuro-Image: A Deleuzian Film-Philosophy of Digital 
Screen Culture. Stanford, CA: Stanford University Press. 

Slusher, Rick. 2010. “Inception: The Architecture.” http://images.fastcompany.com/ 
upload/InceptionArch_Slusher.jpg. 

Souriau, Etienne. 1951. “La structure de lunivers filmique et le vocabulaire de le 
filmologie.”’Revue international de Filmographie, 7-8: 231-240. 

Shaviro, Steven. 2010. Post-Cinematic Affect. Hampshire, UK: Zero Books. 

—. 2012. “Post-Continuity: Full Text of My Talk.” The Pinocchio Theory, March 26. 
http://www.shaviro.com/Blog/?p=1034. 


202 WORLD BUILDING 


Stork, Matthias. 2011. Chaos Cinema, Parti. Press Play. August 22. http://blogs.indiewire. 
com/pressplay/video_essay_matthias_stork_calls_out_the_chaos_cinema. 


Thompson, Kristin. 2008. The Lord of the Rings and Modern Hollywood. Berkeley: 
University of California Press. 

Whitehead, Cameron. 2010. “Inception Music Comparison.” YouTube. July 22. www. 
youtube.com/watch?v=UVkQoC4qDvM. 

Wolf, MarkJ.P. 2012. Building Imaginary Worlds: The Theory and History of Subcrea- 
tion. New York: Routledge. 


Media cited 


Batman. Directed by Tim Burton. 1989. Burbank, CA: Warner Brothers Home 
Video, 2010. Blu-ray. 

Bridget Jones’ Diary. Directed by Sharon Maguire. 2001. Santa Monica, CA: Lionsgate 
Home Entertainment, 2014. Blu-ray. 

Daughters of the Dust. Directed by Julie Dash. 1991. New York: Kino Video, 2000. 
DVD. 

Dazed and Confused. Directed by Richard Linklater. 1993. Universal City, CA: 
Universal Pictures Home Entertainment, 2011. Blu-ray. 

Inception. Directed by Christopher Nolan. 2010. Burbank, CA: Warner Brothers 
Home Video, 2010. Blu-ray. 

M. Directed by Fritz Lang. 1931. New York: Criterion Collection, 2010. Blu-ray. 

Rocky. Directed by John G. Avildsen. 1976. Los Angeles: MGM Home Entertainment, 
2009. Blu-ray. 

Sacrifice, The. Directed by Andrey Tarkovsky. 1986. New York: Kino Video, 2011. 
Blu-ray. 

Stand By Me. Directed by Rob Reiner. 1986. Culver City, CA: Sony Pictures Home 
Entertainment, 2011. Blu-ray. 

Sunset Boulevard. Directed by Billy Wilder. 1950. Burbank, CA: Warner Brothers 
Home Video, 2012. Blu-ray. 

Taken. Directed by Pierre Morel. 2008. Los Angeles: 20'" Centry Fox Home Enter- 
tainment, 2009. Blu-ray. 

Thin Red Line, The. Directed by Terrence Malick. 1998. New York: Criterion Col- 
lection, 2010. Blu-ray. 

When Harry Met Sally. Directed Rob Reiner. 1989. Los Angeles: MGM Home En- 
tertainment, 2015. Blu-ray. 


THE BUILDING AND BLURRING OF WORLDS 203 
About the author 


Justin Horton is a visiting lecturer in the Moving Image Studies program 
at Georgia State University. His research specializations are in the areas 
of film theory and aesthetics, sound studies, and affect theory. His work 
has appeared in Cinephile and twice in Cinema Journal. He is currently at 
work on a book manuscript entitled Bodies that Scatter: Sound, Cinema, 
Figure, Form. 


11. Beyond Immersion 


Absorption, Saturation, and Overflow in the Building of 
Imaginary Worlds 


Mark J.P. Wolf 


Boni, Marta (ed.), World Building. Transmedia, Fans, Industries. Amster- 
dam University Press, 2017 


DOI: 10.5117/9789089647566/cHu1 


Abstract 

While much has been written about “immersion”, it is only the first 
step in the experiencing of an imaginary world. This paper explores the 
experience by going further into the process, with the additional liquid 
metaphors of absorption, saturation, and overflow, and examines not 
only the effects that each of these processes or stages has on the world’s 
audience, but also how world makers actively use them to enhance the 
experience of a world, increasing the illusions of completeness and 


consistency, and cause audiences to keep returning to their worlds. 


Keywords: Immersion; Absorption; Saturation; Overflow; Imaginary 
worlds; Transmedia; Reception; Audience experience 


The Media Studies meaning of the word “immersion” is new enough that 
it does not even appear in the Second Edition of the Oxford English Dictio- 
nary that appeared in 1989, yet much has been written about immersion 
since then (for example, Ryan, 2001; Rose, 2012; and Arsenault, 2005, 50-52). 
Overall, there seem to be three types of immersion, which we could refer 
to as physical immersion (like a theme-park ride); perceptual immersion 
(like a movie); and conceptual immersion (like a novel). Imaginary worlds, 
which provide places for the audience to go vicariously, greatly aid the act of 
conceptual immersion and give us some of the best examples of immersion. 
Yet, when one considers the process of experiencing an imaginary world, 
as well as the process that goes into the building of one, what we call “im- 
mersion’” is really only the first step in the experience. An audience may 
become immersed in an imaginary world, but, unless it is built with care, 


BEYOND IMMERSION 205 


they may have little desire to stay there, learn more about it, or return later. 
Builders of imaginary worlds, then, must consider what happens beyond 
immersion, and we can identify three more such stages in the audience’s 
experience. In keeping with the water metaphor found in “immersion”, I 
will refer to these stages as “absorption”, “saturation”, and “overflow”, which 
I have already written about elsewhere (Wolf, 2012). 

The term “absorption” has already been applied to audience experience; 
in Narrative as Virtual Reality, Marie-Laure Ryan divides “absorption in the 
act of reading” into four degrees: concentration, imaginative involvement, 
entrancement, and addiction (Ryan, 2001, 98-99). As I will use the term 
here, absorption is a two-way process, unlike immersion. In one sense, the 
user’s attention and imagination is absorbed or “pulled into” the world; one 
willingly opens a book, watches a screen, interacts with a game world, and 
so forth; we find ourselves “entering” the imaginary world. At the same 
time, however, the audience also “absorbs” the imaginary world as well, 
bringing it into mind, learning or recalling its places, characters, events, and 
so on, constructing (or reconstructing) the world within their imagination 
the same way that that memory brings forth people, events, and objects 
when their names are mentioned. As we are absorbed into a world, we are 
able to mentally leave, or at least block out, our physical surroundings, 
to some degree, because details of the secondary world displace those of 
the Primary World while we are engaged with it. As psychologist Norman 
Holland describes it: 


We humans have a finite amount of attention or “psychic energy.” At- 
tention is a way of focusing that limited energy on what matters. If we 
concentrate on one thing, an important thing, we pay less attention to 
other things. Those other things become unconscious (or, more accurately, 
‘preconscious’ in Freud’s term). If we use more energy and excitation in 
one prefrontal function, following the play or story, we have less energy 
available for other prefrontal functions, like paying attention to our bod- 
ies or to the [Primary] world around that play or story (Holland 2009, 48). 


Thus, to ensure that absorption will follow immersion, world builders must 
introduce their worlds with the right balance of familiarity and strangeness, 
drawing audiences in with invention while not changing so many defaults 
that confusion or even alienation occurs. Glimpses of a world’s infrastruc- 
tures, though they may be tantalizing, must still present a coherent picture, 
and should also convey a sense of the world’s underlying logic, so as to set 
up some framework into which the audience can mentally begin placing 


206 WORLD BUILDING 


world information as they learn it. A mental model of the world forms in 
their mind, as the world is absorbed by the audience. 

The absorption process can continue in subsequent visits to a world, as 
new information is encountered and added to what the audience already 
knows. Unresolved narrative threads and incomplete infrastructures, 
together with the enigmas that arise in each, may entice the audience to 
return, and each return visit can result ina greater time, effort, and even 
financial investment in a world, giving further reasons for visits to continue. 
On each subsequent visit, the audience will have to call to mind world 
data that they have learned in order to pick up where they left off, similar 
to the way a computer program has to load before it can be run, allowing 
absorption to continue each time a visit is made. 

For larger worlds with a greater number of world data, absorption can 
continue until there are so many world data that one’s mind struggles to 
contain them all, with new information threatening to crowd out older data. 
This state, of having taken in as much world data as one’s mind can hold, 
we might refer to as saturation. Saturation, then, is the pleasurable goal 
of conceptual immersion; the occupying of the audience’s full attention, 
concentration, and imagination, often with more detail, nuances, and sub- 
tleties than can be held in mind all at once. For example, the second edition 
of Tolkien’s posthumously-published book The Silmarillion (Tolkien 1977) 
includes an “Index of Names” listing 788 entries for all the characters, places, 
titles, and terms used in the book. To make matters even more difficult, 
certain characters have multiple names; Turin, for example, is also known 
as Neithan, Gorthol, Agarwaen, Mormegil, Thurin, Wildman of the Woods, 
and Turambar, and several names are shared by more than one character, 
place, or thing; for example, Celeborn, Elemmiré, Gelmir, Gorgoroth, Lórien, 
Minas Tirith, Miriel, and Nimloth all refer to more than one person or place. 
And Tolkien’s names almost always carry meaning as well; after the “Index 
of Names’ is an appendix entitled “Elements in Quenya and Sindarin Names” 
that lists 180 root words and their meanings, from which the majority of 
the 788 entries in the “Index of Names” are formed (thus, different names 
for the same character will have different meanings, which in turn reflect 
the person or people who gave the character a particular name). Many of 
the book’s characters are also related in elaborate family trees and these 
relationships often play an important role in the stories. For example, not 
only is Galadriel Elrond’s mother-in-law, and thus Arwen’s grandmother, 
but Arwen’s parents are actually first cousins thrice-removed. Even the 
names of the various groups of Elves indicate their history and relationship 
to other groups and their experiences as a people. 


BEYOND IMMERSION 207 


The events of The Silmarillion span several thousand years and various 
events are alluded to long after they have occurred or are foretold long 
before they occur, requiring the reader to remember a good deal in order 
to understand the events and the connections and motivations behind 
them. The Silmarillion, in turn, acts as a backdrop and backstory for The 
Lord of the Rings (Tolkien 1954-1955), which frequently alludes to its material 
and, in a sense, is The Silmarillion’s climax and conclusion. For example, 
Aragorn is distantly related to Beren, whose romance with Luthien mirrors 
Aragorn’s romance with Arwen; and Aragorn is also the heir of Isildur, whose 
weakness and fate he hopes will not match his own. While one can read and 
enjoy The Lord of the Rings without having read The Silmarillion, knowledge 
of The Silmarillion adds to the story’s depth and nuance, enhancing the 
reader's pleasure and understanding. 

While Tolkien’s Arda, the world of The Silmarillion and The Lord of the 
Rings, was created by a single author (although his son Christopher helped 
with the maps), today’s transmedial, transauthorial franchises are built by 
dozens of authors, and comprise hundreds of works in various media, and 
the number of world data in these worlds can become incredibly unwieldy. 
For example, on 20 July 2012, Leland Y. Chee, Lucasfilm’s keeper of the Star 
Wars franchise bible known as the Holocron, reported that it contained a 
total of 55,000 entries, including over 2100 different types of vehicles, 2900 
species, 5300 planets, and 19,000 characters (Chee 2012). Some of these bibles 
are produced even before a world debuts, like the 350-page Pandorapedia 
compiled by a team of experts for James Cameron’s film Avatar (2009). Show 
bibles are also commonly used for television shows set in imaginary worlds, 
like Battlestar Galactica, or Dark Skies, or Star Trek: Voyager (often, samples 
of these bibles can easily be found by searching the Internet). 

Saturation can affect one’s experience of an imaginary world in other 
ways as well. In many video games, especially those of the adventure game 
genre, players must be able to remember a wealth of details about the game's 
imaginary world in order to put together its backstory and solve puzzles, 
both of which are often needed to win the game. The worlds of the largest 
massively multiplayer online role-playing games (MMORPGs), with their 
vast territories, millions of player-characters, and ongoing events, are too 
large for any player to know in their entirety, allowing even the most hard- 
core players to achieve saturation. The amount of detail and information, 
which overwhelms the audience, imitates the vast amount of Primary World 
information that cannot be mastered or held in mind all at once. 

What happens when world data continues to be added after the point 
of saturation? To continue our liquid metaphors, this is the point at which 


208 WORLD BUILDING 


overflow occurs. An overflow beyond the point of saturation is necessary 
ifthe world is to be kept alive in the audience’s imagination. If the world is 
too small, the audience may feel that they know all there is to know, and 
consider the world exhausted, feeling there is nothing more to be obtained 
from it. A world with an overflow beyond saturation, however, can never 
be held in the mind in its entirety; something will always be left out. What 
remains in the audience’s mind then, is always changing, as lower levels of 
detail are forgotten and later re-experienced and reimagined when they 
are encountered again. For example, someone can read Tolkien’s works 
in grade school, high school, college, and later; and with each re-reading, 
the reader will notice new things, make new connections, and reimagine 
events and characters due to the reader's own changed level of maturity 
and experience. 

While this can also occur with smaller works that do not reach the same 
levels of saturation or overflow, it is those that do that provide more interest- 
ing re-visioning, as forgotten details return in new imagined forms, and new 
configurations of detail and information inhabit the reader’s mind. Even 
in the case of visual media like film and television, in which images and 
sounds are concrete and fixed, the way we imagine the unseen parts of the 
world may change with each viewing. We may ask different questions and 
focus on different aspects that we had not previously considered, resulting 
in a different experience insofar as our speculation and imagination is 
concerned. These differences arise due to the way we complete narrative 
and world gestalten, which also depends on our own previous experience. 

Thus, builders of imaginary worlds can use the stage of overflow to 
perpetuate their worlds in the minds of the audience, and bring them back 
for the challenge of trying to contain it all, to make new connections, and 
new conceptualizations that reveal new ways of thinking about a world. 
In order to control what happens during the overflow stage, world builders 
need to consider what exactly is occurring during it. 

So what exactly becomes lost when overflow occurs? At first glance, it 
may seem that new information displaces old information, and that the 
oldest data are the ones to be forgotten first. But the significance of various 
details differs greatly, and not everything is granted equal importance by 
the audience. It might then seem that the least significant details are the 
ones that are forgotten, things tangential to the main storylines, or details 
on the fringes of world infrastructures which appear infrequently or have 
very little role in the world’s events. But here, too, the significance of details 
is something that is guessed at by the audience, who may misread their 
significance, or even be deliberately misled by the author as to what is 


BEYOND IMMERSION 209 


significant and what is not. An example of such misdirection can be found 
in murder mysteries, where clues are often planted in such a way as to seem 
extraneous or inconspicuous, and only later is their significance revealed. 
Sometimes details take on more significance as a world grows, even for an 
author; for example, the magic ring that Bilbo finds in The Hobbit (Tolkien 
1937) becomes a central part of The Lord of the Rings, though it was not 
intended as such from the start. 

Story and world details are not so much lost as combined with other 
data into hierarchical units through which a world is represented, through 
a process known in psychology as “chunking”. In Thought and Choice in 
Chess (de Groot 1946), chess psychologist Adriaan D. de Groot wrote about 
how chess masters conceptualized and memorized positions differently 
than ordinary players, grouping the pieces together into larger units that 
are meaningful wholes. The process of grouping elements together in or- 
der to deal with more of them in one’s working memory was later termed 
“chunking” by George A. Miller in 1956, and the process has been written 
about in psychological literature since then (Miller 1956, 81-97). Chunking 
involves grouping lower-level objects or details into higher-level “chunks”, 
enabling the user to hold more in working memory, and also facilitating 
storage and recall as well. Examples would be grouping numbers or letters 
together into larger units for memorization, or configurations of pieces on 
a chessboard, or even stars into constellations. In the case of narratives 
found in novels, the divisions between chunks are already suggested by 
the author by the way the story is divided into chapters, since these breaks 
often give coherency to the events contained within a particular chapter. 

When applied to a world, chunking will most likely involving grouping 
details within world infrastructures, such as maps, timelines, languages, 
cultures, and so on, combining them into a chunk with a higher place in 
an infrastructure hierarchy. Characters may be grouped with the families 
or institutions they are part of, buildings with the cities they are in, foreign 
words with the languages they belong to, and so on. For example, even 
though they are all introduced by name, most people will probably not 
remember the names of all twelve dwarves in The Hobbit, but will instead 
think of them as Thorin’s company. Characters may be grouped into the 
peoples they belong to, and likewise, we may have an image of a land like 
Mordor, Gondor, Narnia, or Islandia, even if we do not remember all the 
geographical features they contain. Whether it occurs consciously or uncon- 
sciously, chunking causes the audience to analyse a world and determine 
how to group its elements, and the more elements that are combined into 
a chunk, the richer those chunks, and the world overall, will seem. 


210 WORLD BUILDING 


Builders of worlds, then, can use overflow to their advantage for different 
purposes. First, overflow can promote chunking and enrich the audience's 
experience, engaging the audience in the act of organizing, categorizing, 
and combining the world information that they encounter, similar to 
the completion of a world’s gestalt. Just as visual gestalten allow one to 
complete an image from partial visual information, world gestalten involve 
piecing together data and clues that allow the audience to extrapolate 
world infrastructures and speculate on questions that world information 
does not answer directly. Chunking combines elements together as well, 
and though it need not include the same filling-in process, the higher-level 
element that results from the process may seem more complete than the 
collection of elements that make up the chunk, since connections will be 
made despite missing pieces that would have otherwise been a part of the 
same chunk. 

Second, overflow encourages audiences to make return visits, during 
which they can re-experience and re-conceptualize a world, improving 
their understanding and mental image of it; the pleasurable challenge of 
trying to hold everything in mind is something one finds often among fans, 
as discussions of small details, and the respect given experts in Internet 
forums, can attest. Great amounts of detail allow one to change one’s focus 
on subsequent readings or viewings, and each one can refine one’s mental 
image of a world. For example, reading The Lord of the Rings as a child, young 
adult, and older adult will likely produce somewhat different conceptions 
of Middle-earth at each reading; not because the text has changed, but 
because the reader has. 

Finally, overflow allows authors to hide data temporarily (as in the mur- 
der mystery example above) and also to hide what we might call aggregate 
implausibilities, those inconsistencies that are only noticeable when a range 
of different data are brought together and compared, even though each 
datum, taken separately, is plausible by itself.’ The fact that overflow also 
encourages multiple readings or viewings means that these inconsistencies 
or mistakes are also more likely to be discovered, but, quite often, audiences 
seem to enjoy finding them, though only if they are so well-hidden that 
finding them makes one feel as though one has achieved a certain level of 
mastery over the text or world. These mistakes, then, become fodder for 
trivia games or fan-forum Internet discussions, wherein participants not 
only use knowledge of these errors to show their mastery ofa text or world, 
but also try to explain away such inconsistencies through the application of 
other world knowledge, an act that, perhaps, can be explained by the fact 
that one does not want to feel that a world that one has invested so much 


BEYOND IMMERSION 211 


time and effort in is not as consistent as one would like it to be, which would 
damage the illusion that one has worked so hard to preserve and enlarge. 

If overflow continues as chunking occurs, higher and higher levels of 
chunking will be encouraged. This does not, however, simplify a story or a 
world, since chunks are constantly disassembled and reassembled as new 
information reconfigures the relationship between existing chunks. With 
large amounts of world material, audiences can choose between many 
different ways of chunking material. They may connect their own narrative 
threads, following characters’ lives through a series of works, or the history 
of a location, or chains of causes and effects that stretch across multiple 
narratives set in the same world. World builders have often used this as a 
reason to develop new parts ofa world, and they may even be influenced by 
which parts of a world seem to inspire the most interest in their audience. 
For example, Boba Fett began as a relatively minor character in Star Wars 
Episode V: The Empire Strikes Back, but the enigmatic character found great 
popularity among fans, resulting in his backstory being given in Star Wars 
Episode II: Attack of the Clones and his being retconned? into Star Wars 
Episode IV: A New Hope. 

The desire to gather large amounts of world information and chunk 
them into ever-greater understanding and more complete mental images 
of a world can partly explain the popularity of non-narrative ancillary 
works like dictionaries, encyclopedias, glossaries, technical manuals, and 
other reference works based solely on a world and its information. While, 
to the outsider, such works might seem tedious at best and be criticized for 
being heaps of made-up data and details that have little or nothing to do 
with the real world, to the person saturated with an imaginary world, they 
can be seen as the answers to questions and verifications of speculations, 
that provide a way for the audience to measure the accuracy of their own 
guesses about a world, as well as further information and glimpses of a world 
not provided in any previous works. World builders who attain this level 
of interest in their worlds within their audiences have even more options 
for releasing world information, allowing them to round out their worlds 
in areas that they might otherwise not have been able to, for example, in 
the development of languages, geography, technical information, or other 
data that would be difficult to include within a story. Such practices also 
encourage transmedia world building, which provides multiple venues 
for world information and narratives, and the range of different media 
windows through that a world is seen helps to make the world seem more 
real, more like the Primary World (our world), which is often experienced 
through multiple media. 


212 WORLD BUILDING 


The related phenomena of immersion, absorption, saturation, and 
overflow, then, help to explain the process of the experience of an imagi- 
nary world and consideration of how they operate can aid world builders 
who wish to maximize their effects. Plenty of popular worlds already 
provide examples of successful world building that leaves fans hungry 
for additional world data, no matter in what form it is released. Some of 
these have been around for decades and grown so enormous, that it seems 
inconceivable that anyone, even with a lifetime of study, could master all 
the details that they contain. Such imaginary worlds, then, are the largest 
and most complex entities ever conceived by the human imagination, and 
it is no wonder that so much time is spent in contemplating and visiting 
them. 


Notes 


1 An example of an aggregate implausibility appears on page 47 of my book 
Building Imaginary Worlds: The Theory and History of Subcreation, which 
has to do with Bilbo and Gollum being able to understand each other’s lan- 
guage, despite the differences in their cultures and the passage of time. 

2. Occasionally, franchise creators will [...] go back and alter earlier works to 
make them consistent with later ones, a process now referred to as “retroac- 
tive continuity” or “retcon” (see also: Wolf, 2012, 46). 


Works Cited 


Arsenault, Dominic. 2005. “Dark Waters: Spotlight on Immersion.” In: Game 
On North America 2005 International Conference Proceedings, 50-52. Ghent, 
Belgium: Eurosis-ETI. 

Chee, Leland Y. 2012. “What is the Holocron?” from Star Wars Blog, July 20, 2012, 
http://starwarsblog.starwars.com/index.php/2012/07/20/what-is-the-holocron/ 
(accessed March 19, 2013). 

de Groot, Adriaan D. 2008. Thought and Choice in Chess. Amsterdam, Holland: 
Amsterdam University Press. 

Holland, Norman. 2009. Literature and the Brain. Gainesville, Florida: PsyArt 
Foundation. 

Miller, George A. 1956. “The Magical Number Seven, Plus or Minus Two: Some 
Limits on our Capacity for Processing Information.” Psychological Review, 5 
(3), Volume 63, 81-97. 


BEYOND IMMERSION 213 


Rose, Frank. 2012. The Art of Immersion: How the Digital Generation Is Remaking 
Hollywood, Madison Avenue, and the Way We Tell Stories. New York, New York: 
W. W. Norton & Company. 

Ryan. Marie-Laure. 2001. Narrative as Virtual Reality: Immersion and Interactivity 
in Literature and Electronic Media. Baltimore, Maryland: The Johns Hopkins 
University Press. 

Tolkien, J. R. R. 1937. The Hobbit. London, England: George Allen & Unwin. 

Tolkien, J. R. R. 1954-1955. The Lord of the Rings. London, England: George Allen 
& Unwin. 

Tolkien, J. R. R.1977. The Silmarillion. London, England: George Allen & Unwin. 

Wolf, MarkJ. P. 2012. Building Imaginary Worlds: The Theory and History of Subcrea- 
tion. New York and London: Routledge. 


Media Cited 


Star Wars Episode V: The Empire Strikes Back. Directed by Irvin Kershner. 1980. Los 
Angeles, CA: zoth Century Fox Home Entertainment, 2011, Blu-ray. 

Star Wars Episode II: Attack of the Clones. Directed by George Lucas. 2002. Los 
Angeles, CA: zoth Century Fox Home Entertainment, 2011, Blu-ray. 

Star Wars Episode IV: A New Hope. Directed by George Lucas. 1977. Los Angeles, 
CA: 20th Century Fox Home Entertainment, 2011, Blu-ray. 


About the author 


Mark J. P. Wolf is Professor and Chair of the Communication Department 
at Concordia University Wisconsin. He has a B.A. (1990) in Film Production 
and an M.A. (1992) and Ph.D. (1995) in Critical Studies from the School of 
Cinema/Television (now renamed the School of Cinematic Arts) at the 
University of Southern California. His books include Abstracting Reality: 
Art, Communication, and Cognition in the Digital Age (2000), The Medium 
of the Video Game (2001), Virtual Morality: Morals, Ethics, and New Media 
(2003), The Video Game Theory Reader (2003), The Video Game Explosion: A 
History from PONG to PlayStation and Beyond (2007), Myst and Riven: The 
World of the D’ni (2011), The Video Game Theory Reader 2 (2008), Before the 
Crash: An Anthology of Early Video Game History (2012), the two-volume 
Encyclopedia of Video Games: The Culture, Technology, and Art of Gaming 
(2012), Building Imaginary Worlds: The Theory and History of Subcreation 
(2012), The Routledge Companion to Video Game Studies (2014), LEGO Studies: 


214 WORLD BUILDING 


Examining the Building Blocks of a Transmedial Phenomenon (2014), Video 
Games Around the World (2015), the four-volume Video Games and Gaming 
Culture (2016), Revisiting Imaginary Worlds: A Subcreation Studies Anthology 
(forthcoming), Video Games FAQ (forthcoming), The Routledge Companion 
to Imaginary Worlds (forthcoming), The Routledge Companion to Media 
Technology and Obsolescence (forthcoming), and two novels for which his 
agent is looking for a publisher. He is also founder and co-editor of the 
Landmark Video Game book series from University of Michigan Press. 
He has been invited to speak in North America, South America, Europe, 
Asia, and Second Life, and is on the advisory boards of Videotopia and the 
International Journal of Gaming and Computer-Mediated Simulations, 
and on several editorial boards including those of Games and Culture, The 
Journal of E-media Studies, and Mechademia: An Annual Forum for Anime, 
Manga and The Fan Arts. He lives in Wisconsin with his wife Diane and his 
sons Michael, Christian, and Francis. 


12. Zombie Escape and Survival Plans 
Mapping the Transmedial World of the Dead 


Bernard Perron 


Boni, Marta (ed.), World Building. Transmedia, Fans, Industries. Amster- 
dam University Press, 2017 


DOI: 10.5117/9789089647566/CH12 


Abstract 

This essay reflects on the notion of space in the world building of zombie 
fiction. Running in particular through the Resident Evil (1996-present, 
initially a video game) and The Walking Dead (2003-present, initially a 
comic book) franchises, it will analyse the ways spaces and places are 
represented and designed, as well as the (player) characters’ behaviors 
these spaces and places motivate. More precisely, in order to underscore 
the questions of survival and of horror, it will focus on enclosed and 
contested spaces or, in other words, on the concept of the fortress and of 
the seminal notion of the labyrinth. 


Keywords: Zombie, Video game, TV series, Comic book, Film, The Walking 
Dead, Resident Evi 


It is commonly recognized that, in the mid-gos, “zombies were saved from 
triviality in popular culture and made frightening again, this time by video 
games” (McIntosh 2008, 11). What’s more, as Shawn McIntosh stated just 
after acknowledging the importance of the tenth art, “In many ways, in fact, 
they were and are ideally suited to the video game environment” (ibid.). If 
one considers the notion of “environment” not in the sense of a system on 
which a computer program runs, but instead as the combination of external 
physical conditions that affect and influence the growth, development, 
and survival of organisms; as the surroundings in which people carry on 
a particular activity; and as the state of being environed, McIntosh could 
not have been more correct. 

While zombies are seen as the Everymonsters that might appear in many 
variations of the same narrative schema, and while the interactive nature 


216 WORLD BUILDING 


of the video game indisputably engages the protagonists in direct con- 
frontations with the undead, one should not forget that Capcom’s Resident 
Evil (1996) was a literal game changer by welcoming the player, through a 
now-famous line during loading screens, to “the world of survival horror” 
(my emphasis) and thereby drawing attention to the spatial dimension of the 
experience. Thus, this essay will reflect on the notion of space in the world 
building of zombie fiction. Running in particular through the Resident Evil 
(1996-present, initially a video game) and The Walking Dead (2003-present, 
initially a comic book) franchises, it will analyse the ways spaces and places 
are represented and designed, as well as the (player) characters’ behaviors 
these spaces and places motivate. More precisely, in order to underscore the 
questions of survival and of horror, it will focuse on enclosed and contested 
spaces or, in other words, on the concept of the fortress and of the seminal 
notion of the labyrinth. 


Undead Worldness 


With video games, comics, films, TV series, novelizations, and novels— 
novels that this essay will not examine—, Resident Evil and The Walking 
Dead have come to be associated with the notion of transmedial world 
building. There is actually a zombie “world” or, better still, a “worldness” to 
these fictions (and many others following the same generic conventions). 
As Lisbeth Klastrup and Susana Tosca have explained: 


What characterises a transmedial world is that audience and designers 
share a mental image of the “worldness” (a number of distinguishing 
features of its universe). The idea of a specific world’s worldness mostly 
originates from the first version of the world presented, but can be elabo- 
rated and changed over time (Klastrup and Tosca 2004, 409). 


Henry Jenkins has continued to explore this convergent cultural creation. 
So often quoted, he states: “More and more, storytelling has become the art 
of world building, as artists create compelling environments that cannot be 
fully explored or exhausted within a single work or even a single medium” 
(Jenkins 2006, 114), citing examples that point, among others, towards the 
walking dead: 


Different franchises follow their own logic: some such as the X-Men (2000) 
movies, develop the world in their first instalment and then allow the 


ZOMBIE ESCAPE AND SURVIVAL PLANS 217 


sequels to unfold different stories set within that world; others, such 
as the Alien (1979) films or George Romero's Living Dead (1968) cycle, 
introduce new aspects of the world with each new instalment, so that 
more energy gets put into mapping the world than inhabiting it (ibid.). 


Actually, the post-apocalyptic zombie universe is difficult to inhabit. And 
its current “worldness” originates from Night of the Living Dead. Romero's 
1968 film has been defined by Jean-Baptiste Thoret as a “matrix film”: 


a film that inspires, that stirs the imagination, which produces a desire 
to connect. Different from the remake, and different as well from single 
quotes or references to previous works, the matrix film contains a number 
of motifs, situations or images that will be reused, transformed (anamor- 
phosés) and reworked in other films (Thoret 2001, 144, freely translated). 


As we know, by dissociating the zombie from the Haitian folklore, Night of 
the Living Dead established the “rules” or “basics” of the modern zombie. 
Rather than slaves under the spell of an evil master using some Vodou 
practices of the Caribbean, the dead now slowly, freely, and instinctively 
walk the earth with the purpose of eating and/or infecting the living; and 
they can only be killed by destroying the brain. Such evil deeds have well 
and truly established a narrative schema: “Many of the zombie movies of 
the 1970s have a plot similar to Night’s: a small group of people are trapped 
in a remote location and have to fight off numbers of slow-moving zombies 
who want to eat them” (McIntosh 2008, 9). Although the new ghoul behavior 
remains the decisive change to the early zombie tropes, another modifica- 
tion is possibly less highlighted but equally significant to the matrix of the 
zombie film. 


Holding Onto the Enclosed Space as Long as Possible 


In White Zombie (Victor Halperin, 1932), set in Haiti, Murder Legendre, 
the zombie master played by Béla Lugosi, inhabits a bastion on a cliff. As 
described by Kyle Bishop: 


Deep in the bowels of his seaside fortress, an army of zombies operates 
the machines of production, cranking a massive grinder by hand and 
transporting a seemingly endless supply of sugar cane to the mouth of the 
mill. This scene in White Zombie emulates a similarly pejorative depiction 


218 WORLD BUILDING 


of the factory as in Fritz Lang’s Metropolis (1927), where seemingly mind- 
less workers run the relentless machines with no apparent thought for 
their own lives and safety (Bishop 2010, 78). 


In Night of the Living Dead, although they are in this first iteration afraid of 
fire, the mindless flesh eaters don’t think about their own safety when the 
strike their prey either. Above all, they have switched role and place: they 
don’t work on the inside and don’t guard the fortress; they are assailing it 
from the outside, as well as from the inside, when humans turn into vora- 
cious cannibals. The rural Pennsylvania home where the survivors end up 
requires adaptations. Bishop explains: “Ben immediately begins a radical 
home renovation to convert the farmhouse quickly into a makeshift fortress. 
Visual ties to The Birds and Last Man on Earth are obvious; Ben uses rough 
tools to attack and incapacitate the zombies, he systematically tosses the 
bodies outside, and he starts dismantling furniture to board up the doors 
and windows’ (ibid., p.116). Whereas the shopping mall of Dawn of the Dead 
(1978) will likewise be secured with materials at hand, the underground 
bunker of Day of the Dead (1985), the ultra-modern city of Land of the Dead 
(1995) as well as the hidden panic room at the end of Diary of the Dead (2007) 
are fortifications specially designed to protect people. 

The first Resident Evil (Capcom, 1996) deftly combines both versions of 
the fortress. Built in the Arklay Mountains, the Spencer Mansion where the 
Special Tactics and Rescue Service (S.T.A.R.S.) Alpha Team takes refuge at 
the beginning of the game in search of the Bravo Team is not what it first 
appears to be. It is “in fact the Arklay Research Facility, where Umbrella 
was conducting experiments for biological warfare, culminating with the 
T-Virus. The unpredictable biological accident was to envelop all of Rac- 
coon City in an inescapable nightmare” (Capcom 2006, 248). Consequently, 
Jill Valentine (or Chris Redfield) has to access the building and breach its 
defensive structures in order to find her or his way to escape it. Their in- 
vestigation establishes the common journey of the (player) characters: first 
getting in, then getting out in order to survive; otherwise, the investigated 
spaces become death traps. The briefing of A Resident Evil Story: Danger- 
ous Secrets in the first comic book (Kris Oprisko, Ted Adams and Carlos 
D’Anda, WildStorm, 1998) recounts these events. The team of paramilitary 
commandos descending to the Umbrella underground genetic research 
facility called “The Hive” during the first movie (Resident Evil, Paul W.S. 
Anderson, 2002) makes the same trip, and not everyone comes out alive. 
The zombies of Resident Evil and the others creatures infected by the virus 
are also the products of White Zombie and Night of the Living Dead. They 


ZOMBIE ESCAPE AND SURVIVAL PLANS 219 


are in the fortress insofar as they were the employees (i.e. the slaves of 
the Umbrella Corporation); Jill emphasizes this truth to Albert Wesker 
towards the end of the game: “So, you are a slave of Umbrella now, along 
with these virus monsters.” But it does not matter whether they are inside 
or outside the space; they respect the Romerian living dead behavior matrix 
and impulsively walk toward the player character even though they'll be 
killed (see, for instance: Perron 2017). In the end, or in the beginning if we 
look at the origin of the havoc, it’s because one of the zombies got outside 
the walls of the research laboratories that the virus has spread and infected 
the population of Raccoon City. 

The threat ofa full-scale humanitarian disaster is difficult to control and 
to keep within limits. Regardless of the means, the growing horde of the 
living dead will invariably walk or crawl toward the human hideouts, will 
continuously push against the boundaries before eventually succeeding to 
invade the secured spaces (many times facilitated by the unwise behaviors 
of survivors or the hostile attempts of takeover by other parties). Bordered 
by rivers and an electric fence, even the well-guarded Fiddler’s Green of 
Land of the Dead will suffer such a fate and have its inhabitants horribly 
eaten. That is why, referring to Night of the Living Dead, Matthew Weise 
derives from these unavoidable breaches another key pattern: 


As barricades are overwhelmed, survivors fall back to individual rooms, 
relying more on weapons. This concept of the “shrinking fortress” is a 
mainstay of the subgenre, finding expression in virtually every zombie 
film, whether on a small scale as in Shaun of the Dead (a pub) [Edgar 
Wright, 2004] or on an epic scale as in Land of the Dead (an entire city) 
(Weise 2009, 253). 


Weise then explains how the first Resident Evil could not express this 
concept because the rooms of the Mansion were distinct spaces crossed 
only by the player character. 


The player always knew they were safe when they reached a door, since 
doors were inaccessible to zombies. Furthermore, the nature of how the 
load screens worked made doors magical safe zones. Even with a small 
horde of zombies blocking a doorway the player could still escape at the 
touch of a button as long as they were able to touch the door (ibid., 255). 


Quite rightly, however, Weise underlines in one endnote that Resident Evil 
4 (Capcom, 2005) “manages to re-create the shrinking fortress mechanics 


220 WORLD BUILDING 


of Night of the Living Dead with fantastic fidelity” (Ibid., 265 n. 28). Ina 
remote rural region of Europe, Leon S. Kennedy searches for Ashley Gra- 
ham, captive daughter of the President of the United States, while being 
constantly assaulted by local villagers (more infected than living dead). 
In many locations, and especially during the first two chapters, he is able 
to enter the farmhouses and push furniture like bookcases and storage 
cabinets in front of doors and windows. This will only delay or slow down 
the invasion. For instance, the cabin where Leon, Luis, and Ashley bar- 
ricade themselves in chapter 2-2 is attacked from everywhere, even from 
the second floor, accessed by ladder. Since there is no place to fall back, 
Leon and Luis must kill 40 enemies before the horde suddenly gives up and 
let them live, temporarily. 

From a world-building perspective, the Walking Dead franchise is actu- 
ally about mapping the world of the undead. That world is indeed dotted 
with fortresses, not shrinking as much as breached and overcome ones, 
rendering the fight useless and leading the characters to flight. From the 
beginning of the story in the comic books, the survival of Rick Grimes 
and the various survivors regrouped around him is a matter of space. The 
characters realize in the first issues that they can’t live out in the open or 
in outdoor environments because the zombies can approach and strike 
from any direction. As Frédérick Maheux notes after making a reference 
to Max Brooks’ The Zombie Survival Guide: Complete Protection from the 
Living Dead (2003): 


This pragmatic approach to space underscores two basic narrative forms 
for the zombie narrative: a sedentary form, where the survivors fortify 
a place and camp there, and a nomadic form, where the survivors have 
to travel from point A to point B (or simply keep moving). (Maheux 2015 
189, freely translated) 


In issue eight (Robert Kirman and Charlie Adlard, Image Comics, May 
2004), the Wiltshire Estates are the first secure fenced domain that the 
characters encounter and in which they briefly settle down. They are soon 
swarmed by a horde of hungry dead residents because they had unwisely 
neglected to inspect the neighbourhood; a mistake they will never repeat. 
The group ends up at Hershel Greene’s farm. This is also the case for Lee 
Everett and Clementine in the initial episode of Telltale Games’ The Walking 
Dead (April 24, 2012). Both in the comic and in the game, the newcomers 
are rapidly kicked out by Hershel following deadly incidents involving his 
family members and zombies (they only remain for three issues in the comic 


ZOMBIE ESCAPE AND SURVIVAL PLANS 221 


book; i.e. issues ten, eleven, and twelve of July, August, and September 2004). 
Things do not happen this way in the TV series. Compared to the rhythm 
of the comic book, in which the story is cut into short issues and quick 
narrative arcs, and to the video game in which the exploration of the farm is 
limited and therefore lasts only a brief time (the exploration of space being 
one of the distinctive features of the video game), Rick and his companions 
spend the entire second season there (AMC, 2011-2012). The series makes the 
most ofits sedentary setting and particularly well-developed characters by 
infusing the narrative with additional pathos. As Bishop observes: 


What makes the series such an important contribution to the zombie 
canon |...] is how The Walking Dead ups the ante on screen horror by mak- 
ing the characters so well developed, likable, and imperilled. Although 
the zombies obviously function as catalysts for the show’s physical action 
and apocalyptic story line, the core of The Walking Dead addresses the es- 
sential concerns of dramatic pathos: the struggles, losses, and emotional 
traumas experienced by the human protagonists. (Bishop 2011, 9-10) 


The first task of the protagonists is, indeed, to try to make their surroundings 
safe. As well as this is achieved, they will nonetheless be overwhelmed bya 
horde of walkers during the final episode. Once again, the space becomes 
uninhabitable; they must move on. 

Both the thirteenth issue of the comic book (October 2004) and the 
first episode of the third season of the TV series (AMC, 14 October 2012) 
bring the group to an actual stronghold: a prison, literally an enclosed 
space meant to keep some in while keeping others out. To seek such sites 
is a recommendation from Max Brooks’ survival manual dealing with the 
potentiality of a zombie attack: 


In Class 3 outbreaks [a hue crisis], private homes and even public struc- 
tures prove insufficient to support human life. Eventually, the people 
inside will have either suffered the eventual degradation of their defenses, 
or simply run out of supplies. What is needed in a severe outbreak is a 
nearly impregnable structure with all the facilities of a self-sustaining 
biosphere. What is needed is a fortress. (Brooks 2003, 87) 


Owing to the exceptional sturdiness of its fence, the clan is indeed able to 
inhabit the prison for quite a long time, allowing them to begin planning 
a new life (36 comic issues from October 2004 to April 2008, and the whole 
third TV series season and half of the fourth one). As mentioned above, the 


222 WORLD BUILDING 


fences are eventually breached, though not initially by the walking dead, 
but, rather, by human enemies. The barricaded parking lot of the motor inn 
in the third episode of Telltale Games’ The Walking Dead (28 August 2012) is 
similarly breached because of a bandit offensive. The fact remains that, in 
order to survive, as is the case in more recent storylines, the protagonists 
must live behind walls, such as those of the Alexandria Safe-Zone (first 
appearance in issue 69, January 2010, and the eleventh episode of the 
fifth season of the TV series; 22 February 2015), the Hilltop Colony (first 
appearance in issue 94, February 2012) and “The Kingdom” community 
(first appearance in issue 108, March 2013). In Telltale’s The Walking Dead: 
Season Two, the hardware store William Carver's group uses as a refuge 
and base of operations (mainly in episode three, AMC, 13 May 2014) is 
similarly isolated. 

Given the importance of the concept of the fortress, Plants vs. Zombies 
(George Fan and PopCap Games, 2009) may well be the zombie video game 
par excellence. Indeed, it simplifies the dominant trajectory of zombies into 
a straight line of attack, while the sole goal of the human survivorsis to 
defend their “tower”. By combining the mechanics of first person shooter, 
survival horror, tower defence, role-playing, and open-world games, 7 Days 
to Die (The Fun Pimps, 2016) accentuates these survival and horror themes. 


Navigating the Contested Space as Carefully as Possible 


In order to contain the epidemic, the Umbrella Corporation erects a wall 
around Raccoon City at the beginning of Resident Evil: Apocalypse (Alex- 
ander Witt, 2004). As opposed to the survivors of The Walking Dead, who 
enter the prison by choice, the townspeople are imprisoned without their 
consent due to the quarantine. They are trapped in an especially unsafe 
area. This seclusion goes against an important survival tip of Brooks: 


AVOID URBAN AREAS: No matter what your chances for survival are 
during an infestation, they will undoubtedly drop by 50 if not 75 percent 
when traversing an urban area. The simple fact is that a place inhabited 
by more living will have more dead. The more buildings present, the 
more places to be ambushed. These buildings also decrease your field of 
vision. Hard cement surfaces, unlike soft ground, do nothing to muffle 
footsteps. Add to that the chances of simply knocking something over, 
tripping over debris, or crunching over broken glass, and you have a recipe 
for avery noisy trip. Also, [...], the possibility of being trapped, cornered, 


ZOMBIE ESCAPE AND SURVIVAL PLANS 223 


or otherwise surrounded in an urban area is infinitely greater than it is 
in any wilderness setting. (Brooks 2003, 100) 


Insofar as the movie was inspired by Resident Evil 2 (Capcom, 1998), Resident 
Evil 3: Nemesis (Capcom, 1999), and Resident Evil: Code: Veronica (Capcom, 
2000), it built on the ways these games were designed. In fact, to refer to 
McIntosh’s comment quoted in the introduction, the video games truly 
enhance the environment of zombie postapocalyptic fiction. Once more, 
we must emphasize their spatial dimensions. 

Rooting the video game in architecture, landscape painting, sculpture, 
gardening, and amusement-park design, Henry Jenkins and Kurt Squire 
see it as a spatial art: 


Game worlds are totally constructed environments. Everything there 
was put on the screen for some purpose—shaping the game play or 
contributing to the mood and atmosphere or encouraging performance, 
playfulness, competition, or collaboration. If games tell stories, they do so 
by organizing spatial features. If games stage combat, then players learn 
to scan their environments for competitive advantages. Game designers 
create immersive worlds with embedded rules and relationships among 
objects that enable dynamic experiences. (Jenkins and Squire 2002, 65) 


Above all, they single out one fundamental motif: “Stripped to their simplest 
elements, the earliest digital games consisted of little more than contested 
spaces. Picture Pac-Man gobbling his way through a simple maze and trying 
to avoid getting caught by ghosts. As game technology improves, the potential 
for creating complex and compelling spaces seems unlimited” (ibid.). The 
reference to Pac-Man (Namco, 1980) is especially relevant and the reading 
proposed by Chaim Gingolde expands on the forces at work and at play: 


Spatially speaking, Pac-Man’s maze helps to structure the game’s dynam- 
ics and drama. Power pellets are tucked away in the corners, making them 
hard-to-reach treats. As an arena, the maze forces the ghosts, Pac-Man 
and the pellets into constant contact, releasing a focused and continuous 
drama. The maze is also a recognizable puzzle form, which motivates 
the player to move through it. Tactically, the Pac-Man maze has multiple 
meanings: it is both an obstacle to acquiring food and escaping ghosts 
and a means to trap and outwit those ghosts. Each maze also functions 
as a level to complete, breaking the game up into discrete dramatic units. 
(Gingolde 2007, 79) 


224 WORLD BUILDING 


Once enclosed by the wall, the city of Resident Evil: Apocalypse becomes a 
giant Pac-Man-like maze. It is thus not a big step to compare the zombies to 
the ghosts, the various guns and ammunitions found to the power pellets 
and the (player) characters to the Pac-Man. The gameplay and drama involve 
moving through the labyrinth to get the pellets, namely the documents and 
items scattered all around; in the video games, some of these items—such 
as keys, crests, masks, emblems, plates or handles—are necessary to end 
a “level” or a chapter, to get access to new locations, and to pursue the 
investigation. 

The many events that make up the main plot of the Resident Evil fran- 
chise revolve around the top-secret activities of the Umbrella Corporation 
and its paramilitary organization. The storylines as developed across 
media involve the discovery of classified information, the uncovering of 
malicious activities responsible for the zombie outbreak, and attempts to 
eliminate the threat of bioterrorism. The war has gone global: Resident Evil 
5 (Capcom, 2009) is set in Africa; Resident Evil 6 (Capcom, 2012) covers the 
United States, China, Edonia, and the deep see of the Northern Atlantic; 
Resident Evil: Retribution (Paul W. S. Anderson, 2012) goes to Japan and 
Russia; the last three issues of the comic book Resident Evil: Fire and Ice 
(Kris Oprisko, Ted Adams, Lee Bermejo and Shawn Crystal, WildStorm, 
February to May 2001) alternately take place in Mexico and Alaska; the 
outbreak in the five issues of the manga Resident Evil: Marhawa Desire 
(Capcom and Noaki Serizawa, Editions Kurosama, 2012-2014) is situated 
near Singapore; and the action of the first issue of Resident Evil: Volume 
Two (Ricardo Sanchez, and Kevin Sharpe, WildStorm, May 2009) even 
takes place in outer space. The various members of the S.T.A.R.S. Alpha and 
Bravo Teams, of the Bioterrorism Security Assessment Alliance, or of the 
U.S Secret service, as well as their relatives or allies, are all involved in and 
committed to this mission. The film series is centered on a character not 
present in the games: Alice (played by Milla Jovovich). While this former 
security operative of the Umbrella Corporation suffers from amnesia in the 
first installment, she slowly discovers that she is infected by the T-Virus, 
but, moreover, that she is bonding with it, a condition that gives her special 
abilities. Her journey into and through the storyworld is based on revenge 
and on saving humankind. 

From Raccoon City in Resident Evil 2 and Resident Evil 3: Nemesis (Capcom, 
1999), to the Spencer Mansion and its surroundings in Resident Evil, and to 
the foreign Umbrella facility and island in Resident Evil: Code: Veronica, 
the labyrinth is the common spatial motif. According to the study of Clara 
Fernandez-Vara, 


ZOMBIE ESCAPE AND SURVIVAL PLANS 225 


Physically, labyrinths and mazes are bounded spaces to be traversed; their 
main purpose is to delay the walker [in the general sense and not as a 
kind of walking dead] as he goes from point A to point B. This delay can 
be achieved by extending the distance between those two points, tracing 
meandering paths or branching those paths and forcing the walker to 
guess the correct one. Confusion and disorientation are also ways to 
obstruct the path to the exit. (Fernandez-Vara 2007, 74) 


The first Resident Evil games are known for their backtracking, for the player 
character’s need to bring specific objects back to a place already visited in 
order to proceed to new parts of the environment or, because the player 
character can only carry a limited number of items at a time, to the location 
of item boxes where useful objects can be stored. In order to orient oneself, 
the exploration and re-exploration is aided by a “Map” function that can be 
accessed from the status screen: “Select this option to view the rooms and 
areas you have already visited. This feature helps you keep track of where 
you need to go” (Resident Evil's instruction guide). Nonetheless, as Alfred 
Korzybski famously stated, “A map és not the territory it represents, but, 
if correct, it has a similar structure to the territory, which accounts for its 
usefulness” (Korzybski 2000, 58). The map does not actually represent the 
genuine horrific playground, inasmuch as it doesn’t display the “biohaz- 
ard” (the original release title in Japan). The “world of survival horror” is a 
tangible space contested by the (rarely solitary) zombie. In the games, the 
comic books and the movies, the characters must be ever-cautious. They 
generally explore the corridors and rooms with their gun raised and ready 
to shoot; their safety relies on purging literal death threats. 

Reiterating an analysis I make elsewhere about video games (Perron 
2017), I'll recall that the zombie is a “definer of space”: “If the corridor is 
tight enough, then the zombie becomes an actual wall of the corridor. If 
the zombie traps the player in a dead end, then the narrow space becomes 
increasingly narrower. The zombie in this situation becomes a shambling, 
clawing, biting barrier” (Totten 2012). Stressing that the player character 
needs to “survive the space”, Maheux notes that “The videoludic zombies in 
Resident Evil occupy a spatial barrier role. They are more than enemies to 
be destroyed; they are traps that limit exploration by the player” (Maheux 
2015, 195, freely translated). Jill or Chris might be safe when they reach a door 
in Resident Evil, but they do not know what’s on the other side. At the very 
beginning of Resident Evil 2, Claire or Leon is forced to face three zombies 
suddenly pushing open a wire-mesh fence because the back alley of the Gun 
Shop turns out to be a dead end. The spatial presence of the living dead is 


226 WORLD BUILDING 


central in the other media too. The Alpha and Bravo Teams are, for instance, 
ambushed by the living dead in the jungle in the second issue of Resident 
Evil: Volume Two. Because the maintenance tunnels of the Hive are flooded 
by a huge wave of zombies, Alice and the remaining group members of the 
first movie must walk on the overhead pipes to escape. Examples like these 
are as legion as the walking dead. 

The prison of The Walking Dead is undoubtedly a huge labyrinth, not 
inhabited at its center by a solitary Minotaur (rather, in the original story, 
it’s four inmates who are initially found in the cafeteria), but by roam- 
ers locked in various rooms (the guards opened the cells as the situation 
deteriorated). The labyrinth must be claimed from the undead. In both 
the comic and the TV series, the group settles down near the exit. Yet, the 
maze is—literally and metaphorically—made darker in the television 
adaptation; the contrast between the bright outdoors and the gloomy 
interior is salient. It must be explored with flashlights. As there are multiple 
entrances to the prison, it is traversed repeatedly with great peril and not 
without casualties. It is in one of its corridors, littered with zombie corpses, 
that Glen finds a disturbed Rick after the death of Lori. The transmedial 
story of The Walking Dead certainly relates to the sedentary form of the 
zombie narrative, as the survivors attempt to find and settle in a secure 
haven. Nevertheless, insofar as such a sanctuary is hard to locate and, as 
we have seen, to keep and defend, The Walking Dead also relies much on 
the nomadic narrative form. The sudden departure from the prison after 
the offensive of the Governor’s troops splits and spreads the group across 
the area. They must keep moving to stay alive and to eventually reunite. 
In the video game, the young Clementine, Telltale’s new main character, 
playable in the second season (2013-2014), embarks on a long and seemingly 
endless journey after leaving her home at the beginning of this storyline. 
In his study of the zombie invasion in the video game space, Maheux uses 
the distinction made by Deleuze and Guattari between two types of space: 
“In striated space, one closes off a surface and ‘allocates’ it according to 
determinate intervals, assigned breaks; in the smooth, one ‘distributes’ 
oneself in an open space, according to frequencies and in the course of 
one’s crossings (logos and nomos)” (Deleuze and Guattari 1987, 481). Maheux 
then explains that the space of Resident Evil is striated, separated in rooms 
and doors (intervals and breaks) and that the open world of a game like 
Dead Island (Techland, 2011) is a smooth and open space. In that case, 
Maheux shows, “zombies are more obstacles based on time rather than 
space. The player knows that to get to any destination, he will face an 
infinite number of creatures” (Maheux 2015, 198). As a result, the wilds are 


ZOMBIE ESCAPE AND SURVIVAL PLANS 227 


no less a contested space than the maze. The nomads must remain just as 
cautious as the settlers. An encounter with one or many zombies in the 
fields and forest is a constant possibility, a fact made painfully clear on 
numerous hikes nearby and between temporary homes. The characters 
must always secure a camp and install some kind of alarm around it. 
The predator might not be smart, but the humans are still the prey. And 
no matter how many flesh eaters are killed, there will always be others 
coming. The growing horde walking towards Hershel’s farm in the opening 
scene of the last episode of the second season of the TV series The Walking 
Dead (18 March 2012) strikingly expresses this. 


Razing Everything in Their Path to the Ground 


The Resident Evil and The Walking Dead franchises have been and are still 
highly popular. They are, without a doubt, compelling environments that 
can be explored across media. Ultimately, they lean on the paradox of the 
living dead, of being at once alive and dead. Although the franchises create 
worlds, the created places and locations are, whatever the media, to be 
destroyed. In fact, to reverse Jenkins’s assertion quoted at the beginning of 
this essay and to underline once more the ins and outs of these apocalyptic 
fictions, it is precisely because the zombie worlds are so difficult to inhabit 
that energy is put into mapping them. No matter when the survivors stop 
moving and where they settle down, the flesh eaters will keep coming to 
overwhelm them mindless intent. The invasion remains definite and total. 
As SWAT team officer Peter Washington (played by Ken Foree) asserts in 
Dawn of the Dead (Romero, 1978): “When there's no more room in hell, the 
dead will walk the earth.” We could then say: “When there’s no more room 
in one medium the dead will walk another one.” 


Works Cited 


Bishop, Kyle William. 2011. “The Pathos of the Walking Dead.” In: Triumph of the 
Walking Dead: Robert Kirkman’s Zombie Epic on Page and Screen, edited by James 
Lowder, 1-14. Dallas: Smart Pop. 

Bishop, Kyle William. 2010. American Zombie Gothic: The Rise and Fall (and Rise) 
of the Walking Dead in Popular Culture. Jefferson, NC: McFarland. 

Brooks, Max. 2003. The Zombie Survival Guide: Complete Protection from the Living 
Dead.New York: Three Rivers Press. 


228 WORLD BUILDING 


Capcom. 2006. Resident Evil Archives (1960-1998), vol.1.Indianapolis: Brady Games. 

Deleuze, Gilles; and Guattari, Félix. 1987. A Thousand Plateaus: Capitalism and 
Schizophrenia (1980), translated by Brian Massumi. Minneapolis: University 
of Minnesota Press. 

Fernandez-Vara, Clara. 2007. “Labyrinth and Maze: The classic labyrinth.” In: 
Space Time Play—Computer Games, Architecture and Urbanism: The Next Level, 
edited by Friedrich Von Borries, Steffen P. Walz, and Matthias Bottger, 74-796. 
Basel: Birkhauser. 

Gingold, Chaim. 2007. “Pac-Man: A Maze with Multiple Meanings.” In: Space Time 
Play—Computer Games, Architecture and Urbanism: The Next Level, edited 
by Friedrich Von Borries, Steffen P. Walz, and Matthias Böttger, 78-79. Basel: 
Birkhauser. 

Jenkins, Henry and Squire, Kurt. 2002. “The Art of Contested Spaces.” In: Game On, 
edited by Lucian King and Conrad Bain, 64-75. New York: Universe. 

Jenkins, Henry. 2006. Convergence Culture: Where Old and New Media Collide. New 
York: New York University Press. 

Klastrup, Lisbeth, and Tosca, Susana. 2004. “Transmedial Worlds—Rethinking 
Cyberworld Design.” In: Proceedings of the 2004 International Conference on 
Cyberworlds, edited by Masayuki Nakajima, Yoshinori Hatori, and Alexei Sourin, 
409-416. Los Alamitos, CA: IEEE Computer Society. 

Korzybski, Alfred. 2000. Science and Sanity: An Introduction to Non-Aristotelian Sys- 
tems and General Semantics, 1933. Brooklyn, NY: Institute of General Semantics. 

Maheux, Frédérick. 2015. “Du vaste a l’exigu: l’invasion zombie dans les espaces 
vidéoludiques.” In: Z pour Zombies, edited by Bernard Perron, Samuel Archibald, 
and Antonio Dominguez Leiva, 189-201. Montréal: Presses de l’Université de 
Montréal. 

McIntosh, Shawn. 2008. “The Evolution of the Zombie: The Monster That Keeps 
Coming Back.” In: Zombie Culture. Autopsies of the Living Dead, edited by Shawn 
McIntosh and Marc Leverette, 1-17. Lanham, MD: Scarecrow Press. 

Perron, Bernard. 2017. “Lallure et la portée des zombies vidéoludiques.” In: Chas- 
seurs de zombies: réflexions sur le mort-vivant, edited by Simon Harel, Jérôme- 
Olivier Allard, and Marie-Christine Lambert-Perreault. Québec: Presses de 
l'Université Laval. 

Thoret, Jean-Baptiste. 2011. Cinéma contemporain: mode d’emploi. Paris: 
Flammarion. 

Totten, Christopher W. 2012. “Building a Better Zombie.” Gamasutra.com, June 28, 
online at http://ubm.io/1inSUyqT. 

Weise, Matthew J. 2009. “The Rules of Horror: Procedural Adaptation in Clock Tower, 
Resident Evil, and Dead Rising.” In: Horror Video Games: Essays on the Fusion of 
Fear and Play, ed. by Bernard Perron, 238-266. Jefferson, NC: McFarland. 


ZOMBIE ESCAPE AND SURVIVAL PLANS 229 
Media Cited 


7 Days to Die. Developed by The Fun Pimps. Published by The Fun Pimps. 2016. 
Microsoft Windows and OS X. 

Dawn of the Dead. Directed by George A. Romero. 1978. Beverly Hills, CA: Anchor 
Bay Entertainment, 2004, DVD. 

Day of the Dead. Directed by George A. Romero. 1985. Los Angeles, CA: Scream 
Factory, 2013, DVD and Blu-Ray. 

Diary of the Dead. Directed by George A. Romero. 2007. New York City: The Wein- 
stein Company, 2008, DVD. 

Land of the Dead. Directed by George A. Romero. 1995. Universal City, CA: Universal 
Studios Home Entertainment, 2005, DVD. 

Night of the Living Dead. Directed by George A. Romero. 1968. San Francisco, CA: 
Internet Archive. Online. 

Pac-Man. Developed by Namco. Tokyo and Chicago, IL: Namco and Midway. 1980. 
Arcade. 

Plants vs. Zombies. Developed by George Fan and PopCap Games. Seattle, WA: 
PopCap Games. 2009. Microsoft Windows and OS X. 

Resident Evil. Developed by Capcom. Chuo-ku, Osaka, and San Francisco, CA: 
Capcom. 1996. Sony PlayStation. 

Resident Evil #1. Resident Evil Story: Dangerous Secrets. Written by Kris Oprisko 
and Ted Adams. Art by Carlos D’Anda. WildStorm. 1998. 

Resident Evil: Fire and Ice. Written by Ted Adams and Kris Oprisko. Art by Lee 
Bermejo and Shawn Crystal. WildStorm. 2001. 

Resident Evil. Directed by Paul W.S. Anderson. 2002. Culver City, CA: Sony Pictures 
Home Entertainment, 2004, DVD. 

Resident Evil: Apocalypse. Directed by Alexander Witt. 2004. Culver City, CA: Sony 
Pictures Home Entertainment, 2004, DVD. 

Resident Evil: Code: Veronica. Developed by Capcom. San Francisco, CA: Capcom. 
2000. Sega Dreamcast. 

Resident Evil: Volume Two. Written by Ricardo Sanchez. Art by Kevin Sharpe. 
WildStorm. May 2009. 

Resident Evil: Marhawa Desire. Written by Capcom. Art by Naoki Serizawa. Editions 
Kurosama. 2012-2014. 

Resident Evil: Retribution. Directed by Paul W. S. Anderson. 2012. Culver City, CA: 
Sony Pictures Home Entertainment, 2012, DVD. 

Resident Evil 2. Developed by Capcom. Chuo-ku, Osaka, and San Francisco, CA: 
Capcom. 1998. Sony PlayStation. 

Resident Evil 3: Nemesis. Developed by Capcom. Chuo-ku, Osaka, and San Francisco, 
CA: Capcom. 1999. Sony PlayStation. 


230 WORLD BUILDING 


Resident Evil 4. Developed by Capcom. Chuo-ku, Osaka, and San Francisco, CA: 
Capcom. 2005. Nintendo GameCube. 

Resident Evil 5. Developed by Capcom. Published by Capcom. 2009. Sony Play- 
Station 3. 

Resident Evil 6. Developed by Capcom. Published by Capcom. 2012. Sony Play- 
Station 3. 

The Walking Dead. Written by Kirkman. Art by Tony Moore (issues 1-6) and Charlie 
Adlard (issue 7 onward). Image Comics. 2003-present. 

The Walking Dead, AMC, 2010-present. Television Series. 

The Walking Dead, Season One. Developed by Telltale Games. Published by Telltale 
Games. 2012. 

Microsoft Windows, OS X, Sony PlayStation 3 and Microsoft Xbox 360. 

The Walking Dead, Season Two. Developed by Telltale Games. Published by Telltale 
Games. 2014. Microsoft Windows, OS X, Sony PlayStation 3, Sony PlayStation 
4, Microsoft Xbox 360 and Microsoft Xbox One. 

White Zombie. Directed by Victor Halperin. 1932. New York City, Kino Video: 2013, 
Blu-Ray. 


About the author 


Bernard Perron is Full Professor of Film and Game Studies at the University 
of Montreal. He has, among others, co-edited The Video Game Theory Reader 
1 (Routledge, 2003), The Video Game Theory Reader 2 (Routledge, 2009), 
The Routledge Companion to Video Games Studies (2014), and Z for Zombies 
(Presses de l'Université de Montréal, 2015). He has edited Horror Video 
Games: Essays on the Fusion of Fear and Play (McFarland, 2009). He has also 
written Silent Hill: The Terror Engine (University of Michigan Press, 2012) in 
The Landmark Video Games book series he is co-editing. His research and 
writings concentrate on video games, interactive cinema, the horror genre, 
and on narration, cognition, and the ludic dimension of narrative cinema. 


13. MMORPG as Locally Realized Worlds 
of Action 


Laurent Di Filippo 


Boni, Marta (ed.), World Building. Transmedia, Fans, Industries. Amster- 
dam University Press, 2017 


DOI: 10.5117/9789089647566/CH13 


Abstract 

This paper addresses the question of concrete realizations of imaginary 
worlds as situated worlds. As a case study, the author bases his reflections 
on Age of Conan: Hyborian Adventure, an MMORPG based on the adven- 
ture of Conan the barbarian, the character created by Robert E. Howard 
in the 1930s. The author of the paper uses Erving Goffman’s theory of game 
and the notions of “locally realized world” and “membrane” to address 
this situated production. He then discusses the place of the player and 
the relations to the representations in the game as a vicarious experience 
and a distance implied by playful practices. By crossing several works 
of Erving Goffman, the author shows that immersion in gaming worlds 
is the product of both being absorbed in the action and maintaining a 
distance with it in order to be at the same time an actor and a spectator 
of the action. 


Keywords: MMORPG, Action, Immersion, Transmedial World, Conan 


While younger than other forms of expression, video games have gained 
much popularity in the last few decades. They are now often part of broad 
multi-platform commercial strategies and, thereby, offer specific actualiza- 
tions of fictional worlds that appear on various media (as also seen in the 
previous chapter). 

Within the framework of the recent “world” trend in media studies 
(Ryan and Thon 2014, 1), I suggest to consider another point of entry to 
the study of “worlds”, borrowing thoughts from the sociologist Erving 
Goffman and crossing perspectives about games and world building. This 
work aims to show how a game can be a specific actualization of a world in 


232 WORLD BUILDING 


an interactionist sociological sense and what place it has in a transmedia 
environment. As a case study, I will take Age of Conan: Hyborian Adventures, 
a Massively Multiplayer Online Role Playing Game (MMORPG)' developed 
by the Norwegian company Funcom.’ This game is based on the stories 
about Conan, the famous barbarian invented by the Texan author Robert 
E. Howard, one of the founding fathers of the fantasy genre (Besson 2007, 
100; Parsons 2015, 58). 

The chapter is organized in three progressive steps. First, taking game as 
an example, I will characterize a medium as a particular manifestation ofa 
fictional world which I call a locally realized world and propose another path 
to study the limits ofa gaming situation. Second, I will study the specificities 
of games as places of action. Third, I will show how the preceding develop- 
ments lead to the question of immersion. In my conclusion, I will extend my 
reflections to a broader research question about permanence and change. 


Imaginary worlds and situated worlds 


Age of Conan: Hyborian Adventures is an MMORPG based on Robert E. 
Howard's work. The game is not merely a copy but rather an adaptation of 
the author’s texts. This simple idea points out a twofold characteristic of the 
game as existing at the same time in relation with older cultural material 
and as a specific actualization and expression of this material. Its world 
is reinterpreted to give the players an experience which is different from 
reading the texts. In more theoretical terms, studying games associated 
with a network of productions raises issues concerning the balance between 
“convergence” and “fragmentation” (Ludes 2008, 10) or “convergence” and 
“divergence” (Ryan and Thon 2014, 3). Broadly stated, it is part of a reflec- 
tion about unity and diversity, or permanence and change, within media 
franchises. Questions that arise can be formulated as such: should one 
consider that the world one experiences through various media productions 
ofa franchise is always the same? And, if not, what relations and differences 
exist between those productions? 

One first needs to define the notion of “world” in a gaming situation to 
understand, from an interactionist point of view, what an MMORPG such 
as Age of Conan represents as part of a transmedia franchise. The definition 
of “world” can vary greatly in social sciences and in the humanities. All 
uses of the word are not compatible, but, instead, they offer various angles 
for studying social and human phenomena depending on the academic 
discipline and the scientific interests of researchers. In literature and media 


MMORPG AS LOCALLY REALIZED WORLDS OF ACTION 233 


studies, “imaginary worlds’ are often considered as “secondary worlds” built 
by individuals living in the “primary world”. In his recent book, Mark J.P. 
Wolf sees each medium as a window opening onto a secondary world (Wolf 
2012, 248). This implies worlds existing beyond the medium that presents 
them. A similar idea of distinction is also present in T.L. Taylor’s work, when 
she says that players “play between worlds”, which means “playing back, and 
forth, across the boundaries of the game world, and the ‘real’ or nonliteral 
game space” (Taylor 2006, 17). Thereby, Taylor takes over the divide between 
online and offline world. 

The main difficulty with these theories is that they set apart the pri- 
mary and the secondary worlds as they oppose the real and the imaginary 
worlds, sometimes labelled as a distinction between “real” and “virtual” or 
“game” and “ordinary life”. In my opinion, however, this conception does 
not help to understand some characteristics of Man in the anthropological 
and sociological sense. One can wonder how real a fictional world is as it 
has concrete material manifestations and is the result of production and 
reception activities. How can we consider the reality of the experience of 
a fiction? 


Transmedial worlds and world-building activities 


Robert E. Howard’s short stories about Conan appeared in the pulp 
magazine Weird Tales in the first half of the 1930s. Those stories were later 
re-published in books, anthologies, and nowadays on the Internet. Other 
authors followed his works and wrote stories about Conan. Numerous 
productions like comics, games, and films, relate to the franchise (Bertetti 
2014). Each production expresses resources that are part of a broader set 
that forms the “imaginary world” of Conan and allows one to apprehend 
this world in specific mediated forms. Recently, Paradox Entertainment has 
bought the rights to the Conan trademark, ensuring a degree of coherence 
between products.* It can then be labelled as transmedia exploitation. 
Paolo Bertetti has recently suggested to study productions of the Conan 
franchise from a character-centered approach instead of a world-centered 
approach. Nevertheless, the recent collection of novels from the Age of 
Conan collection, which feature other heroes, and the MMORPG, which 
borrows many elements from them, participate in developing the Hyborian 
world beyond the famous barbaric character's original incarnation. 

As Christy Dena (2009, 16) has shown, definitions of transmedia vary. 
Unlike Henry Jenkins, who favors additivity of content upon redundancy in 


234 WORLD BUILDING 


transmedia franchise (Jenkins 2006, 98), Lisbeth Klastrup and Susana Tosca 
see adaptations as possible processes of transmedia construction. They 
argue that “transmedial worlds are abstract content systems from which a 
repertoire of fictional stories and characters can be actualized or derived 
across a variety of media forms” (Klastrup and Tosca 2004, 1). A transmedial 
world lies in the mental construction of the actors and not in its material 
entity (see also: Klastrup and Tosca 2012, 48; Klastrup and Tosca 2014, 297). 
If their idea of abstract construction helps to understand some mental 
subjective processes, their work can be completed by an analysis of local 
actualizations of resources that compose what they call the “repertoire” of 
such a transmedial world. For example, Howard's writings present several 
countries and kingdoms that are part of Conan’s world repertoire, but only 
some of them will be used within the MMORPG. 

Goffman’s theories about games should help to define such local actu- 
alizations more thoroughly. In his book Encounters, dedicated to the study 
of “focused interaction”, he proposes to analyse social situations and the 
implication of actors. In the first essay, called “Fun in Games”, he refers to 
Gregory Bateson’s analysis of play as a “frame” of mind that participates in 
constructing the meaning of a situation (Bateson 1955; Goffman 1961, 20).° 
The sociologist also mentions Kurt Riezler (1941) who analyses what is meant 
by “merely playing” in order to understand how people differentiate play 
and seriousness. According to Riezler, the answer lies in the “horizon” of the 
activity, which is the limit of possible consequences. Therefore, individuals 
will not build causal relations with broader life when they “merely play” 
(Riezler 1941, 517), and “the game is a little cosmos of its own” (Riezler 1941, 
505). Goffman follows Riezler when saying that “games, then, are world- 
building activities” and applies this idea to all possible social situations (1961, 
27). Each gathering of people creates “a world of meaning” (Goffman 1961, 27) 
in which people act according to the relevance of the situation. He defines 
the order of an encounter as “a locally realized world of roles and events” 
that “cuts the participants off from many externally based matters that 
might have been given relevance, but allows a few of these external matters 
to enter the interaction world as an official part of it” (Goffman 1961, 30). 

Goffman’s idea of a world here is therefore not the same as the world of 
literary studies. Saying that Robert E. Howard’s Hyborian Age as well as 
Tolkien’s Middle-earth are imaginary worlds does not lean on the same 
definition of the polysemic notion of world as saying that a card game is 
a “world of role and events” as Goffman uses this notion; that is to say: a 
specific situation providing a meaningful context to the identities and ac- 
tions of the participants. Nevertheless, his work should help to characterize 


MMORPG AS LOCALLY REALIZED WORLDS OF ACTION 235 


the relation established between social actors and specific expressions of 
a fictional universe. 


Locally realized worlds 


Goffman argues that a sense of reality emerges from the meaning given 
to the elements that are parts of a situation. This process participates in 
constructing realized resources that he defines as “locally realizable events 
and roles” based on the material that is available at hand for the actors 
(Goffman 1961, 28). 

Inan MMORPG, characters (playable or non-playable), areas, landscapes, 
monsters, objects, the interface, and all elements, activities, and processes 
are realized resources as long as they are relevant to the situation at hand. 
Let's just take one example: Age of Conan: Hyborian Adventures’ timeline 
follows the novel The Hour of the Dragon, in which Conan is the king of 
Aquilonia. In the game, player-characters can meet this main figure in 
the castle of Tarantia, the capital of Aquilonia. A researcher can study this 
character as a “realized resource” in order to analyse various processes, 
such as his visual and audio representations, his role in various quests, his 
relations to other characters, how players can interact with him, etc. 

Following Goffman, I therefore propose to call the actualization of a 
particular world during a situation a locally realized world. This concept 
includes acts of production, the materiality of the media, and its receptions. 
Stressing the difference between “imaginary worlds” and “realized worlds” 
allows us to reflect upon expressed resources. Each manifestation of the 
world must then be considered through the way it expresses the imaginary 
world, makes it tangible and opens it to interpretation. Marie-Laure Ryan 
and Jan-Noél Thon talk about “represented worlds” that are “sites of crea- 
tive activity in which cultures elaborate their collective social imaginary” 
(Ryan and Thon 2014, 19), thus questioning the link between imagination 
and its concrete manifestations. Playing is therefore not the only way of 
experiencing locally realized worlds. The work of game developers also con- 
stitutes realized actions of the game production process. In a broad sense, 
researchers should look at how expressed resources match the relevance of 
various situations depending on the social actors’ activities. The situation 
also defines the data that researchers are able to gather for their study by 
making them observable. 

Moreover, the locally realized world is not just a fixed occurrence, but 
part of a dynamic process. When a player-character becomes stronger, 


236 WORLD BUILDING 


some situations, like fighting enemies, become easier for him or her. Be- 
ing a first-level beginner or a high-level experienced character does not 
involve the same resources. Changes also occur at the level of the product: 
contents, such as new territories or quests, are added through updates; game 
mechanisms change; seasonal events occur. There is an evolution through 
time and locally realized worlds should be considered more specific than 
the game in general. 


Limits of the realized world and transmedia: membrane and 
transformation rules 


The “local” aspect of realized worlds questions the definition of the limits of 
a social situation. Discussions about the boundaries of games in video games 
studies have often (perhaps too often?) been based on the works of Johan 
Huizinga (1951) and Roger Caillois (1958) and on the notion of “magic circle” 
that the former is supposed to have forged in his book Homo Ludens (Copier 
2009). As Eric Zimmerman (2012) explains, this misconception is due to an 
interpretation of his own book Rules of Play, written with Katie Salen (Salen 
and Zimmerman 2004). Scholars too often agitate the “strawman’” of the 
magic circle to counter the idea that a game is separated from the rest of the 
world,’ even if Huizinga himself underlined that a game has a function for 
the community in which it is played. Play should then not be considered as 
fully separated from the rest of the world, but instead, as having a specific 
place among other activities (Di Filippo 2014). 

Erving Goffman offers another starting point to study the limits of a 
situation and its relations to other social activities. The Canadian sociologist 
proposes to talk about a membrane and explains his choice: “In order to 
think more easily in these organic terms, an organic metaphor might be 
attempted. A living cell usually has a cell wall, a membrane, which cuts the 
cell from components in its external milieu, ensuring a selective relation 
between them and the internal composition of the cell” (Goffman 1961, 
65). Using this metaphor, he argues that each interaction situation has 
its specific relevance and internal consistency and is at the same time in 
relation with a broader context. This duality must be kept in mind when 
studying social interactions. Taken as such, social situations have to be 
understood through the links that they build with other social activities. 
As he argues, “the dynamics of an encounter will be tied to the function- 
ing of the boundary-maintaining mechanisms that cut the encounter off 
selectively from the wider world” (Goffman 1961, 66).° 


MMORPG AS LOCALLY REALIZED WORLDS OF ACTION 237 


In her article about pervasive games, Eva Nieuwdorp (2005, 6-7) proposes 
to shift from the idea of “magic circle” to Goffman’s conception of “mem- 
brane”, stressing three main elements in his theory: rules of irrelevance, 
transformation rules, and realized resources. These three elements help set 
a frame “around a spate of immediate events” (Goffman 1961, 20), as Vinci- 
ane Zabban (2011, 14) points out.? In Synthetic Worlds, Edward Castronova 
(Castronova 2005, 147, 159) also uses the metaphor of a “porous” membrane to 
talk about the limits of the games, without quoting Goffman or addressing 
the question of the transformations that occur when a resource is actualized 
in the game.” 

Goffman also presents two sorts of “boundary-maintaining mecha- 
nisms’: “rules of irrelevance” (Goffman 1961, 19) and “transformation rules” 
(Goffman 1961, 29). The first set of rules can be defined as “the selective 
disregard ofall practices and objects that normally have a meaningful place 
in the life world domain, but which are not in keeping with the cultural 
conventions that apply to the world of the game” (Nieuwdorp 2005, 7). 
For example, the physical strength of a player is not relevant to play Age 
of Conan, but does matter when moving a flat. The second set of rules 
expresses the fact that individuals adapt resources to match the relevance 
of the situation: “the transformation rules of an encounter describe the 
fate of any property as a constituent of internal order” (Goffman 1961, 33). 
Elements of the texts written by Howard about Conan, such as characters, 
landscapes, and monsters, are adapted visually in the MMORPG to appear 
on the computer screen. Rules of irrelevance and transformation rules 
are two faces of the displacement of resources typical of world-building 
phenomena, as “during the move from one medium to another, forms of 
mediation may be lost or gained, causing the material of a story or world 
to be changed” (Wolf 2012, 250). 

Both sets of rules define continuities and changes between locally 
realized worlds and set the ground for a transmedial world. Transformed 
realized resources are the basis for the recognition of those worlds. Such 
a mental construction is made of all connections that individuals build 
between realized worlds. Where those relations are absent, gaps can still 
be filled by interpretation (Wolf 2012, 51). The re-enactment of a scene 
from Howard’s short story The Frost-Giant’s Daughter as a quest in the 
MMORPG can be taken as an example. Ymir’s daughter Atali appears on 
a battlefield and lures the “player-character”" (Di Filippo 2012) into the 
same ambush as Conan in the short story: she will have to fight against 
two frost-giants before Atali finally disappears. The player-character 
takes the place of Conan in the narrative structure and becomes the hero. 


238 WORLD BUILDING 


Putting the player-character at the centre of the story is a transformation 
rule that defines a specificity of the MMORPG. More importance is given 
to the user. Intertextuality, articulated with a shift of point of view from 
reader to player, reveals how the designers intend to bring the consumer 
to experience the world and the adventures of Conan. Designers also call 
on the player’s knowledge of the short story to understand the references. 
MarkJ.P. Wolf has already proposed four types of transformations within 
the frame of transmedial expansion: Description, Visualization, Auraliza- 
tion, Interactivation/de-interactivation (2012, 250-264). In an MMORPG 
like Age of Conan, these rules must not be taken separately, but one has to 
take into account their articulation: a frost-giant is adapted from a textual 
source into a visual form, the encounter with such a being produces sound 
effects, and the “player-character” (PC) interacts with it, often through 
fighting. 

To complete the understanding of such phenomena, we need to take a 
more radical interactionist point of view than Goffman does. The sociologist 
still opposes a situation like gaming to the “wider world”. But the wider 
world is also made up of social interactions: working, being at the gym, 
shopping, going out... All constitute a wide range of situations that have 
to be distinguished from one another. Reading a Conan story certainly 
relates more to the construction of the imaginary world of the MMORPG 
than eating dinner, but the latter may participate in defining a temporal 
schedule in the player’s agenda. A mealtime can therefore be considered as 
sociologically relevant in a study about game practices and time schedule 
organization. 

The metadiscourse about the productions also contributes to bridging 
various locally realized worlds and to the constitution of a feeling of conti- 
nuity between them. Paratext and commercial discourse (all information 
around the game, such as advertising, information on the official and 
unofficial websites, the name on the box, and the login screen) can be 
considered locally realized resources in a situation of informing, advertis- 
ing, or promotion. In 2005, Funcom announced Age of Conan, a project 
based on Robert E. Howard’s stories. Before the game was launched, the 
commercial discourse already participated in defining a future gaming 
situation. Despite the fact that numerous elements in the game are bor- 
rowed from works of his continuators, like John Maddox Roberts among 
others, only Robert E. Howard is generally mentioned. The reputation of the 
original creator and faithfulness to his work are used to promote the game 
and give a feeling of continuity between works considered as canonical, the 
writings of Howard, and later adaptations, like those of his continuators. 


MMORPG AS LOCALLY REALIZED WORLDS OF ACTION 239 
The game world as a place of action 
Action and uncertainty 


Age of Conan was first presented as an “Online Action Role Player 
Game”. This category is often used for games that are more dynamic 
and combat-oriented than turn-based RPG” and relates to Conan’s world 
being presented as very brutal, dark and mature compared to other fantasy 
settings. Gaute Godager, the first game director, said in an interview: “For 
if it’s one thing which is true about Conan is that it is no ordinary fairytale, 
but a brutal, lustful, lush and sinful universe made by grown-ups, for 
grown-ups.” Action and violence are then related and seem to be at the 
heart of the game. 

Erving Goffman addresses the question of “action” in his essay “Where 
the action is” (Goffman 1967). He observes that the term “action” appeared in 
the American society in a “non-Parsonian sense” (Goffman 1967, 149). Parson 
defines action as structures and processes that help to form meaningful 
intentions and implement them, which means that everything that people 
do is then considered as an action (Handler 2012, 182). By contrast, Goffman’s 
use of the term rather refers to an opposition between situations where there 
is action and situations where there is none. As Richard Handler (Handler 
2012, 181) explains, this essay is first of all “about the meaning of the term 
action in the American society” and highlights “his use of native terms as 
analytic terms” (Handler 2012, 188). Goffman’s work is then an analysis of 
the social organization of society through the use of a linguistic category 
that we also find in the naming of the game genre. 

His text highlights sociological problems about decision-making and 
choice in situations of high uncertainty where information is lacking. 
According to him, “wheresoever action is found, chance-taking is sure to 
be” (Goffman 1967, 149) and “for chanciness to be present, the individual 
must ensure he is in a position (or be forced into one) to let go of his hold 
and control the situation, to make, in Schelling’s sense, a commitment. No 
commitment, no chance-taking” (Goffman 1967, 152). Thomas C. Schelling 
(1960) borrows Morgenstern and Von Neumann's game theory in order to 
understand international geopolitical affairs. Goffman met and worked 
with the economist and thus “strengthened his understanding of game 
theoretic accounts of human behaviour” (Fine and Manning 2003, 36).® 
His analysis leads him to propose that “action is to be found wherever the 
individual knowingly takes consequential chances perceived as avoid- 
able” (Goffman 1967, 194). He opposes it to “uneventful moments” which 


240 WORLD BUILDING 


“have been defined as moments that are not consequentially problematic. 
They tend to be dull and unexciting” (Goffman 1967, 174). “Places of ac- 
tion”, as he calls them, offer to experience situations of uncertainty and 
“fatefulness”. 


Fatefulness and vicarious experience 


Goffman included many kinds of activities during which uncertainty 
occurs, like games, casinos, but also movies in a vicarious way. Video games 
were not yet as popular as they are today, but they fit in his description 
as they offer chance-taking and commitment. Games in general can be 
considered more action-oriented than other media, like movies or books. 
One does not roll dice when reading Howard's short stories to know if Conan 
will kill his enemy or not. Butin an MMORPG such as Age of Conan, random- 
ness mechanisms are at the center of the gameplay. 

According to Goffman, society has curtailed fatefulness, in a heroic 
and dutiful sense, from civilian life; that is to say, society has taken away 
from people the possibilities to show their character, as moral quality and 
values (Goffman 1967, 193). As a consequence, places where it is possible 
to confront uncertainty in a “vicarious” way to reaffirm one’s character 
appear to compensate for this loss.” In places of action, “the individual 
brings into himself the role of performer and the role of spectator; he is 
the one who engages in the action, yet he is the one who is unlikely to be 
permanently affected by it” (Goffman 1967, 198). Riezler’s idea of “merely 
play” as an inconsequential activity appears again. An MMORPG like 
Age of Conan offers numerous possibilities to make commitments, to let 
go of his hold and to take a chance: combat, raiding parties, looting, PVP 
sessions, etc. At the same time, the player will never be hurt physically 
like the character, nor will she die. Nevertheless, players invest time, 
dedication, and emotions into the activity and they act in accordance 
to the gaming situation. The involvement in the situation is therefore 
entirely real. 

Places of action are real in the sense that they offer situations during 
which individuals can express and define qualities that cannot be shown 
otherwise, leading to the question of social organization: 


Whatever the reasons why we consume vicarious fatefulness, the social 
function of doing so is clear. Honorable men in their scenes of fateful- 
ness are made safely available to all of us to identify with whenever 
we turn from our real worlds. Through this identification the code of 


MMORPG AS LOCALLY REALIZED WORLDS OF ACTION 241 


conduct affirmed in fateful activities—a code too costly or too difficult 
to maintain in full in daily life—can be clarified and reasserted. A frame 
of reference is secured for judging daily acts, without having to pay its 
penalties. (Goffman 1967, 266) 


Individuals can grasp a bit of the feeling of uncertainty that is sufficient 
to reactivate social values: 


Looking for where the action is, one arrives at a romantic division of 
the world. On one side are the safe and silent places, the home, the well- 
regulated role in business, industry, and the professions; on the other are 
all those activities that generate expression, requiring the individual to 
lay himself on the line and place himself in jeopardy during a passing 
moment. It is from this contrast that we fashion nearly all our commercial 
fantasies. (Goffman 1967, 268) 


Places of action offer a “commercialized vicarious experience” (Goffman 
1967, 262), since “commercialization [...] brings the final mingling of fantasy 
and action” (Goffman 1967, 269). Cultural industries’ productions compen- 
sate the loss of expressive ways for action and social values. Consuming 
fiction is not considered as separate from the rest of life, but as a specific 
expression of social representations. 

Age of Conan is depicted as a dark, violent, and mature game and therefore 
expresses ideas about darkness and violence. The finishing moves, when 
a player-character makes a critical hit and kills an enemy, illustrate this 
idea. The killing is more violent than regular hits, like tearing the enemy’s 
head off with bare hands, happens ina movie-like mise-en-scéne and blood 
is spread on the screen”. In such video games, the values are not always 
those of the “honorable men’ of Goffman’s time, but games still convey social 
values and allow expressions that are forbidden in other kind of situations. 
In a sense, gameplay is a way of expressing a certain code of conduct that 
is not allowed elsewhere. 

In return, the values expressed in fictional situations interrogate moral 
values and codes of conduct in our societies by taking into account the 
frame in which they are expressed. That is why, contrary to what Jessica 
Langer says about otherness and stereotypes which “continue to proliferate 
within online discourse” (Langer 2008, 101), one must always study such 
expression according to the transformation rules occurring between various 
situations, which set a frame around them and which individuals are mostly 
well aware of. 


242 WORLD BUILDING 
Action, “worldness,” space and time 


A look at the game’s implementation of geographies and territories shows 
that MMORPGs are built to bring action to the players and ties our study 
to the notion of world: “one of the key elements of virtual worlds is the 
‘worldness’ or spaces they create for participants” (Consalvo 2011, 330). 
Nevertheless, those terms are “metaphors” that seem to “fit our new experi- 
ences” linked to the idea of “cyberspace” (Consalvo 2011, 330). In other words, 
game worlds are representations that induce the idea of a world. 

Defending a ludological approach, Espen Aarseth said about World of 
Warcraft’s world that “in Azeroth [...] the distances are surprisingly small, 
indicative of the fact that this is in fact no fictional world, but rather a 
functional and playable gameworld, built for ease of navigation” and adds 
“Azeroth is about playability. Tolkien’s world is not designed for play, and 
fictional travel time can contain gaps where readers are spared the boredom 
of the main character putting one foot in front of another for days or months 
without much else happening” (Aarseth 2008, 118). In other words, WoW 
proposes situations of chance-taking and action, but limits uneventful 
moments. 

Age of Conan is an adaptation of a series of texts in which the world is 
a pre-cataclysmic version of Earth. Robert E. Howard drew a map of the 
Hyborian Age superimposed on a map of Europe. His world would be 
several millions of square kilometres large, which is impossible to render 
in a game such as Age of Conan. A selection was made, and only small 
portions of the world are represented as three-dimensional spaces. Those 
regions concentrate the action of the game: quests, monsters, dungeons, 
etc. Other places presented in different Conan productions are absent." 
This limitation confirms the idea of a locally realized version of the world 
of Conan and, in Aarseth’s sense, Age of Conan is therefore “functional 
and playable’. 

Moreover, the game is what designers and players call “instanced”: ter- 
ritories are separated from one another, long travel times between regions 
are replaced by loading screens, and regions can be replicated when the 
number of players is to high in order to avoid the game to slow down. 


Rhetorically, to call something a world is to give it a privileged status as a 
self-contained, autonomous entity. As we have seen, the “world” in World 
of Warcraft is not a proper world, or even a fictional one, but a “world” 
in the theme park or zoo sense, a conglomerate or parkland quilt of con- 
nected playgrounds built around a common theme. (Aarseth 2008, 121) 


MMORPG AS LOCALLY REALIZED WORLDS OF ACTION 243 


This description could also fit Age of Conan as available territories are made 
to propose action to the players. But we have to disagree on the fact that 
“in multiplayer games, space-time cannot be individually flexible, but is, 
in fact, objective and continuous. The players form an in-game community 
of social, localized agents, and this living structure cannot be overruled by 
the temporal lacunas and spatial montages common in works of fiction” 
(Aarseth 2008, 118). As Age of Conan illustrates, there are ellipses and loading 
pages during travelling time for some players, while others stay in one 
region, maybe fighting or chatting. Then, contrary to what Aarseth says 
about World of Warcraft, the experience of space and time in Age of Conan 
is subjective and individually flexible. 


Immersion 


According to Frank Rose (2011, 8), people want to be immersed to make 
their own story. But the use of that metaphor conveys the idea of entering 
another world. As Marie-Laure Ryan says, discourses about technologies 
and virtual reality created “a hype fuelled by the hope that the computer 
could physically transport us into alternate realities” (Ryan 2006, 634). 

Goffman’s “Fun in Games” and “Where the action is” offer two different 
points of view about immersion. In the first, Goffman says that “euphoria 
arises when persons can spontaneously maintain the authorized transforma- 
tion rules” (1961, 66). The mental state of being focused is crucial and that is 
how “being absorbed” occurs (Goffman 1961, 69-70). In the second, he argues 
that some distance is established between individuals and the situation that 
is represented. They never fully confront fatefulness, but nevertheless, “vicari- 
ous experience re-establishes our connection to values concerning character” 
(Goffman 1967, 268). Despite the fact that the relation to fatefulness is indirect 
and mediated, it is sufficient to reassert a code of conduct and values. 

On the one hand, Goffman argues in favor of the attachment to the rules of 
transformation. Participants have to accept the reality of the situation, even 
ifit is fictional. On the other hand, he argues in favour of non-consequential 
participation. The two points of view are not opposed, as they do not apply to 
the same dimension of the situation. Both are about boundary-maintaining 
mechanisms. The first is about cutting oneself from external disturbances 
because “incidents” can cause “flooding out” (Goffman 1961, 45-60). The 
second is about keeping a safe distance from fatefulness. Immersion can 
then be understood in terms of boundary-maintaining processes that 
necessitate focusing without risking any danger for the player. 


244 WORLD BUILDING 


Nevertheless, these ideas deserve some critique. Players take part in 
diversified situations when playing the same game hundreds, even thou- 
sands of hours. MMORPGs offer various activities like quests, player versus 
player fighting (PvP), crafting, high-level raiding, etc. These activities do not 
demand the same kind of involvement. High-level raiding often requires 
more concentration than gathering resources for crafting. Yet, both types of 
playing are part of the game. Players can sometimes be deeply focused on 
the action, without losing sight of the fact that they are playing a fictional 
game, sometimes they are more relaxed. Researchers should then take into 
account the various types of activities and the experience of players facing 
different situations. The notion ofimmersion alone is not relevant enough to 
address the relations that individuals have when interacting with a medium 
or other people during a game situation. 

Furthermore, Kurt Riezler noticed a kind of detachment that play induces 
when one defines a situation as merely playing (Riezler 1941, 506-507). 
However, he notes that not everyone adopts the same attitude toward a 
game. A football champion can take a match very seriously because it is 
part of his professional career. According to Riezler, “playful attitude” means 
detachment from the consequences. Therefore, games and ordinary life 
define a kind of social organization, but they do not imply a corresponding 
playful or serious attitude, as someone can take a game seriously or ordinary 
life as not serious at all. 

Following another lead, one could use the concepts that Mark J.P. Wolf 
suggests in his chapter in this book: “absorption”, in order to understand 
how social actors seize elements of imaginary world; “saturation”, as a limit 
of the amount of information that someone can grasp, and “overflow”, 
which symbolizes the fact that when the amount of information is too high, 
individuals tend to group them in a process of “chunking”. Such concepts 
could be used in order to study how knowledge about an imaginary world 
at the same time is spread and varies among people depending on their 
individual experiences. 


Conclusion: permanence, change, and media studies 


The preceding discussions lead to more general reflections about perma- 
nence and change, which join up with questions about determinism and 
freedom. Goffman was neither a structuralist, nor a radical interactionist, 
as he explains in his presidential address (Goffman 1983). According to 
him, meaning is not fully imposed by larger social structures, but emerges 


MMORPG AS LOCALLY REALIZED WORLDS OF ACTION 245 


from the order of the situation (Rawls 1987; Rawls 1988). Studying relations 
between media and locally realized worlds of a franchise has shown that 
the order is never solely the result of the situation. It is based on previous 
expressions that provide resources that will be transformed, following 
rules of irrelevance and transformation rules, in order to match a new 
relevance. One should complete Goffman’s views by saying that the internal 
meaning is not fully constituted by the interaction, but emerges during a 
specific situation by its internal order and the relations constructed with 
other situations taken in a broader context. Some structures and systems of 
relations (Wolf 2012, 153-197) are similar among various manifestations and 
support the abstractions that are necessary to build a continuity between 
them. At the same time, “rules of irrelevance” and “transformation rules” 
bring change into the situation. 

Video games and, as places of action, MMORPGs more specifically, have a 
specific place in transmedia franchising. They offer possibilities to confront 
fatality and uncertainty and to experience an imaginary world from an 
active place, as they allow players to be actors and spectators at the same 
time. In that sense, negotiating the boundaries of an imaginary world when 
playing does not involve the same mechanisms of immersion as other media 
and researchers should therefore focus on the ways in which imaginary 
worlds are always locally realized. Therefore, transmedia franchises and 
multi-platform world building offer relevant case studies in order to address 
questions about permanence and change in culture. They constitute new 
objects while renewing concerns about old questions that still deserve 
interest from researchers. 


Notes 


1. MMORPG isa genre of multiplayer video games in which a large number 
of players, hundreds or even thousands, play simultaneously on servers 
across the Internet. Researchers have stressed the ideas of shared space and 
persistence of the world, meaning that servers are usually available 24/7 
(Consalvo 201, 326). 

2. The length of this chapter does not allow me to make an extensive descrip- 
tion of the gathered data. Nevertheless, it is important to mention that this 
text is based on an two-year long ethnography of Age of Conan, between 
2010 and 2012, and is part of an on-going PhD thesis. 

3. From the philosophy of “possible worlds” (Ryan 2006; Wolf 2012, 17) to em- 
pirical “social worlds” as Howard S. Becker presented in his study about “art 
worlds’, one can find the “world of daily life” of sociological phenomeno- 


246 


IL. 


12. 


13. 


15. 


WORLD BUILDING 


logy (Schütz 1962, 208), “fantastic worlds” (Rabkin 1979), and “other worlds” 
(Timmerman 1983, 49) of fantasy literature, “game worlds” (Taylor 2006, 
151), “virtual worlds” (Consalvo2011, 326; Boellstorff, Nardi, Pearce and Taylor 
2012) or “synthetic worlds” (Castronova 2005) to talk about digital games; 
“storyworlds” (Ryan and Thon 2014) when it comes to narratology, just to 
name a few examples that can be relevant for us. 

Personal interview with Joakim Zetterberg. Some of the stories of REH are 
now in the public domain and are not the property of Paradox Entertainment. 
The whole definition is: “Transmedial worlds are abstract content systems 
from which a repertoire of fictional stories and characters can be actualized 
or derived across a variety of media forms. What characterises a trans- 
medial world is that audience and designers share a mental image of the 
‘worldness’ (a number of distinguishing features of its universe). The idea of 
a specific world’s worldness mostly originates from the first version of the 
world presented, but can be elaborated and changed over time. Quite often 
the world has a cult (fan) following across media as well” (Klastrup and 
Tosca 2004). 

The disparity of Goffman’s work does not always make continuity between 
his texts obvious (Smith 2006, 5). Nevertheless, this essay provides examples 
for his article “The neglected situation” (Goffman 1964, 135) and lays the 
foundations for his famous book Frame Analysis (Goffman 1974). The idea 
of transformation in the geometrical sense appear in both texts and leads 
him to the idea of “keying” (Goffman 1961, 33; Goffman 1974, 40-82). 

One recent example of such misuse of Huizinga’s work is Mia Consalvo’s 
article “There is no magic circle” (Consalvo 2009). 

Some years later, in his book Interaction Rituals, he defines a conversa- 

tion interaction with the same terms: “a little social system with its own 
boundary-maintaining tendencies” (Goffman 1967, 113). 

Unfortunately, neither Nieuwdorp nor Zabban take into account Riezler’s 
influence on Goffman. 

In an endnote, he thanks F. Randall Farmer for suggesting the term (Cas- 
tronova 2005, 301). 

In a MMORPG, a player-character is the entity based on the association 
between a player and its character. 
http://www.businesswire.com/news/home/20050420005393/en/Funcom- 
Announces-Age-Conan---Hyborian-Adventures#.VMtlly6KkJsc. Accessed 

30 January 2015. 
http://www.businesswire.com/news/home/20050420005393/en/Funcom- 
Announces-Age-Conan---Hyborian-Adventures#.VM5UwC6KJsc. Accessed 
1 February 2015. 

A turn-based RPG is a Role Playing Game in which players take turns while 
playing, by opposition with real-time games where players play simultaneously. 
Gaute Godager, Interview Tothegame.com, published 4 May 2006. http:// 
www.tothegame.com/interview.asp?gameid=2318. Accessed 22 July 2014. 


MMORPG AS LOCALLY REALIZED WORLDS OF ACTION 247 


16. This influence is also remarkable in the essays published two years later in 
his book Strategic interaction (Goffman 1969), which is considered as the 
most oriented toward the rational actors model of his works. 

17. In his book about world building, Mark J.P. Wolf also present fictional world 
as offering a “vicarious experience” (Wolf 2012, 28). 

18. The game also has less cartoonesque graphics than other games, like World 
of Warcraft, and some explicit sexual content is present. 

19. They are not completely absent as they appear on the ingame map, but they 
are not present as three-dimensional environments. 


Works Cited 


Aarseth, Espen. 2008. “A Hollow World: World of Warcraft as Spatial Practice.” In: 
Digital Culture, Play, and Identity. A World of Warcraft Reader, edited by Hilde 
G Corneliussen and Jill W. Rettberg, 111-122. Cambridge/London: MIT Press. 

Bateson, Gregory. 1955, 1972. “A theory of play and fantasy.” In: Steps to an Ecology 
of Mind, 177-193. New York: Ballantine. 

Becker, Howard Saul. 1982. Art worlds. Berkeley: University of California Press. 

Bertetti, Paolo. 2014. “Conan the Barbarian: Transmedia Adventures of a Pulp 
Hero.” In: Transmedia Archeology: Storytelling in the Borderlines of Science Fic- 
tion, Comics and Pulp Magazines, edited by Carlos Scolari, Paolo Bertetti, and 
Matthew Freeman, 15-38. Basingstoke: Palgrave Macmillan. 

Besson, Anne. 2007. La fantasy. Paris: Klincksieck. 

Boellstorff, Tom; Nardi, Bonnie; Pearce, Celia; and Taylor, T.L.. 2012. Ethnography of 
Virtual Worlds. A Handbook of Method. Princeton/Oxford: Princeton University 
Press. 

Caillois, Roger. 1958, 1967. Les jeux et les hommes. Le masque et le vertige. Paris: 
Gallimard. 

Castronova, Edward. 2005. Synthetic Worlds: the business and culture of online 
games. Chicago/London: University of Chicago press. 

Consalvo, Mia. 2009. “There is no Magic Circle.” Games and Culture 4 (4): 408-417. 

Consalvo, Mia. 2011. “MOOs to MMOs: The Internet and Virtual Worlds.” In: The 
Handbook of Internet Studies, edited by Mia Consalvo and Charles Ess, 326-347. 
Malden/Oxford: Wiley-Blackwell. 

Copier, Marinka. 2009. “Challenging the magic circle. How online role-playing 
games are negotiated by everyday life.” In: Digital material: Tracing new media 
in everyday life and technology, edited by Marianne van den Boomen, Sybille 
Lammes, Ann-Sophie Lehmann, Joost Raessens, and Mirko Tobias Schafer, 
159-171. Amsterdam: Amsterdam University Press. 


248 WORLD BUILDING 


Dena, Christy. 2009. Transmedia Practice: Theorizing the Practice of Expressing a 
Fictional World Across Distinct Media and Environments. Phd diss., University 
of Sydney. 

DiFilippo, Laurent. 2012. “Les notions de personnage-joueur et roleplay pour l'étude 
de l’identité dans les MMORPG.” ¿Interrogations? Revue pluridisciplinaire en 
sciences de l’homme et de la société 15. http://www.revue-interrogations.org/ 
Les-notions-de-personnage-joueur. 

Di Filippo, Laurent. 2014. “Contextualiser les théories du jeu de Johan Huizinga et 
Roger Caillois.” Questions de communication 25: 281-308. 

Fine, Gary Alan; and Manning, Philip. 2003. Erving Goffman. In: Blackwell Com- 
panion to Major Contemporary Social Theorists, edited by George Ritzer, 34-62. 
Malden, MA: Blackwell Publishing. 

Goffman, Erving. 1961, 2013. Encounters. Two Studies in the Sociology of Interaction. 
Mansfield Center: Martino. 

Goffman, Erving. 1964. The Neglected Situation. American Anthropologist 66 (6): 
133-136. 

Goffman, Erving. 1967. Interaction Ritual. Essays on Face-to-Face Behavior. New 
York: Pantheon Books. 

Goffman, Erving. 1969, 1972. Strategic Interaction. An analysis of Doubt and Calcula- 
tion in Face-to-Face, Day-to-Day dealings with one another. New York: Ballantine 
Books. 

Goffman, Erving. 1974, 1986. Frame Analysis. An essay on the Organization of 
Experience. Boston: Northeastern University Press. 

Goffman, Erving. 1983. The Interaction Order. American Sociological Review 48 
(1): 1-17. 

Handler, Richard. 2012. “What’s up, Doctor Goffman? Tell us where the action is!.” 
Journal of the Royal Anthropological Institute 18 (1): 179-190. 

Huizinga, Johan. 1938, 1988. Homo Ludens. Essai sur la fonction sociale du jeu. Paris: 
Gallimard. 

Jenkins, Henry. 2006. Convergence culture: where old and new media collide. New 
York: New York University Press. 

Klastrup, Lisbeth; and Tosca, Susana. 2004. “Transmedial Worlds—Rethinking 
Cyberworld Design.” In: Proceedings of the 2004 International Conference on 
Cyberworlds, edited by Masayuki Nakajima, Yoshinori Hatori, and Alexei Sourin, 
409-416. Los Alamitos, CA: IEEE Computer Society. 

Klastrup, Lisbeth; and Tosca, Susana. 2011. “When fans become players: The Lord 
of the Rings Online in a transmedial world perspective.” In Ring Bearers. The 
Lord of the Rings Online as Intertextual Narrative, edited by Tanya Krzywinska, 
Esther MacCalum-Stewart, and Justin Parsler, 46-69. Manchester/New York: 
Manchester University Press. 


MMORPG AS LOCALLY REALIZED WORLDS OF ACTION 249 


Klastrup, Lisbeth; and Tosca, Susana. 2014. “Game of Thrones. Transmedial Worlds, 
Fandom, and Social Gaming.” In: Storyworlds Across Media: Toward a Media- 
Conscious Narratology, edited by Marie-Laure Ryan and Jan-Noél Thon, 295-314. 
Lincoln/London: University of Nebraska Press. 

Langer, Jessica. 2008. “The familiar and the foreign: Playing (Post)Colonialism.” In: 
Digital Culture, Play, and Identity. A World of Warcraft Reader, edited by Hilde G. 
Corneliussen and Jill Walker Rettberg, 87-108. Cambridge/London: MIT Press. 

Ludes, Peter. 2008. “Introduction: Unity in Diversity.” In: Convergence and Frag- 
mentation, edited by Peter Ludes, 9-23. Bristol/Chicago: Intellect Books. 

Nieuwdorp, Eva. 2005. “The Pervasive Interface: Tracing the Magic Circle.” In: 
Proceedings of the Digital Games Research Conference — Changing Views: Worlds 
in Play. Vancouver, Canada. Accessed May 25, 2016. http://www.digra.org/wp- 
content/uploads/digital-library/06278.53356.pdf. 

Parsons, Deke. 2015.J.R.R. Tolkien, Robert Howard and the Birth of Modern Fantasy. 
Jefferson: McFarland & Co Inc. 

Rabkin, Eric S. 1979. Fantastic Worlds: Myths, Tales and Stories. Toronto: Oxford 
University Press. 

Rawls, Anne Warfield. 1987. “The Interaction Order Sui Generis: Goffman’s Con- 
tribution to Social Thoery.” Sociological Theory 5 (2): 136-149. 

Rawls, Anne Warfield. 1988. “Interaction vs. Interaction Order: Reply to Fuchs.” 
Sociological Theory 6 (1):124-129. 

Riezler, Kurt. 1941. “Play and Seriousness.” The Journal of Philosophy 38 (19): 505-517. 

Rose, Frank. 2011. The Art of Immersion. New York/London: W. W. Norton. 

Ryan, Marie-Laure. 2006. “From Parallel Universes to Possible Worlds: Ontological 
Pluralism in Physics, Narratology, and Narrative.” Poetics Today 27 (4): 633-674. 

Ryan, Marie-Laure; and Thon, Jan-Noél. 2014. “Storyworlds across Media: Introduc- 
tion.” In: Storyworlds Across Media: Toward a Media-Conscious Narratology, 
edited by Marie-Laure Ryan and Jan-Noél Thon, 1-21. Lincoln, Neb./London: 
University of Nebraska Press. 

Salen, Katie; and Zimmerman, Eric. 2004. Rules of Play. Cambridge/London: MIT 
Press. 

Schelling, Thomas C. 1960. The Strategy of Conflict. Cambridge/London: Harvard 
University. 

Schiitz, Alfred. 1962. “On multiple realities.” In: Collected Papers I, 207-259. The 
Hague: Martinus Nijhoff. 

Smith, Greg. 2006. Erving Goffman. London/New York: Routledge. 

Taylor, T.L. 2006. Play Between Worlds: Exploring Online Game Culture. Cambridge/ 
London: MIT Press. 

Timmerman, John H. 1983. Other Worlds: the Fantasy Genre. Bowling Green: Bowl- 
ing Green University Popular Press. 


250 WORLD BUILDING 


Wolf, MarkJ.P. 2012. Building Imaginary Worlds. The Theory and History of Subcrea- 
tion. New York/Londres: Routledge. 

Zabban, Vinciane. 2011. “Ceci est un monde.” Le partage des jeux en ligne: conceptions, 
techniques, et pratiques, PhD diss. Université Paris-Est Marne-la-Vallée. 

Zimmerman, Eric. 2012. “Jerked Around by the Magic Circle. Clearing the Air Ten 
Years Later”, Gamasutra. http://www.gamasutra.com/view/feature/135063/ 
jerked_around_by_the_magic_circle_.php. 


Media Cited 


Age of Conan: Hyborian Adventures. 2008. Oslo, Norway: Funcom. Massively 
Multiplayer Online Role Playing Game (MMORPG). 


About the author 


Laurent Di Filippo has a PhD in communication Studies and is Dr. des. 
in Scandinavian studies. He is a member of the Center for Research on 
Mediations (CREM). His main research area is the use of Norse mythology 
in contemporary cultural productions and more specifically the Massively 
Multiplayer Online Role Playing Game Age of Conan: Hyborian Adventures. 
He is also interested in several fields such as reflexivity in research, trans- 
media, and the history of social sciences. He is a member of the board 
of the French open-access peer-reviewed journal Interrogations and has 
co-edited the books La position du doctorant. Trajectoires, engagements, 
réflexivité (2012) and Actualité de la question interdisciplinaire en sciences 
de l'information et de la communication. Expériences de recherches situées 
(2016). 


Section 4 


Media as World-Building Devices 


14. 


The Worries of the World(s) 


Cartoons and Cinema 


Karen Redrobe (formerly Beckman) 


Boni, Marta (ed.), World Building. Transmedia, Fans, Industries. Amster- 
dam University Press, 2017 


DOI: 10.5117/9789089647566/CH14 


Abstract 

In recent years, Cinema and Media Studies scholars have hotly debated 
animation’s connection to “the world”; its capacity to fabricate “worlds”; 
as well as the relationship between singular and plural conceptions of this 
concept. The problems of worlding in animation are further complicated 
by parallel debates about what we mean by the term “animation” to begin 
with. Suzanne Buchan, Paul Wells, and Maureen Furniss, among others, 
have made clear that this broad term encompasses a wide variety of media 
practices. Though these may share movement as acommon denominator, 
they differ profoundly from each other. At the same time as these scholars 
call for greater attention to specific media practices (e.g. for distinctions 
between 2D and 3D animation, or hand-drawn and computer anima- 
tion), other scholars, including Lev Manovich and Alan Cholodenko, 
have argued instead that animation should be further generalized to 
encompass all cinema as an umbrella term. In the course of this essay, I 
will attempt not only to map the contours of cinema and media theory’s 
animated debates about worlding, but also why the stakes of these debates 
become particularly prevalent at specific historical moments. 


Keywords: Child’s world, Alternative Reality, Political Imagination, 
Plasmaticness, Play 


The Problem of “Animation” 


In the last few years, Cinema and Media Studies scholars have hotly debated 


animation’s connection to and investment in the physical world and lived 
reality (related but not synonymous terms). At stake, in part, is the political, 


254 WORLD BUILDING 


aesthetic, and affective significance of this form’s fabricated and sometimes 
imaginary worlds, as well as the relationship between singular and plural 
conceptions of the very idea of “world.” 

Yet, within a longer history of the study of moving images, many scholars 
have tended to ignore animation as an inconsequential, even childish, 
area of practice. Writing in 1982 of early film animation, Donald Crafton 
suggests, “Film distributors (and alas, until recently, film collectors) tended 
to regard these cartoons as material better suited for the dustbin than for 
any other repository. More recently, film scholars have tended to ignore 
early animation or to condemn it to the domain of film-buffism” (Crafton 
1982, 4-5). 

What exactly do we even mean by “animation”? A better understand- 
ing of this notion could also highlight the complexity of the relationship 
of animation and worlds. As Suzanne Buchan points out, “animation is 
an imprecise, fuzzy catchall that heaps an enormous and historically far- 
reaching, artistically diverse body of work into one pot” (Buchan 2014, 113). 
The term is rarely clear, and yet Steve Reinke argues that “some of the most 
interesting writers on animation provide, at best, partial or inconsistent 
definitions of animation” (Reinke 2005, 9). Some theorists, including Alan 
Cholodenko and Lev Manovich, have productively asserted “animation” as 
an umbrella term that embraces all forms of cinema. More recently, Tom 
Gunning has attempted to bring some nuance to this all-encompassing 
gesture by suggesting that we “bisect our term animation into two related 


m 


but separable meanings” (Gunning 2014, 40). He posits “animation” as refer- 
ring to “the technical production of motion from the rapid succession of 
discontinuous frames, shared by all cinematic moving images.” By contrast, 


n2 


“animation” refers to “moving images that have been made to move, rather 
than movement automatically captured through continuous-motion picture 
photography’ (ibid., 40). In this second form of animation, there is, Gunning 
argues, greater room for experiences of play, fascination, and wonder that are 
rooted in “a fundamental manipulation of time” (ibid., 41). It is also in this 
second form that we get a stronger sense of a world that has been animated, 
rather than of a world whose movement has been recorded and reproduced. 

Further complicating the logistical challenge of grappling with anima- 
tion’s world-making capacities, animator George Griffin reminds us that in 
addition to incorporating and hybridizing many different media practices, 
animators also exhibit their work in a variety of venues. The “worlds” in which 
we find animation include the cinema, television, online, the art gallery, 
public space, and “urban forbidden zones” (Griffin 2013, 289). Increasingly, 
to live in the contemporary world means engaging that world—whether 


THE WORRIES OF THE WORLD(S) 255 


we like it or not—with and through animation. It is, as Buchan argues, 
pervasive: “As screens become part of everyday life—phones, laptops, pads, 
and future technologies to come—animation will increasingly influence 
our understanding of how we see and experience the world visually” 
(Buchan 2013, 1). 

Even within a more defined realm such as “cinematic animation’—and 
Donald Crafton singles out Emile Cohl and Winsor McCay as figures who 
took animation beyond mere special effects and “whimsical divertisse- 
ment” into a definitively cinematic world—there is still a wide variety of 
alternative, and often hybrid modes (Crafton 1982, 9, 60-61). “Animation” 
cannot belong to a single history because the term simply invokes too 
broad an array of media, technologies, venues, and uses. Yet, while it may 
be impossible to tell a definitive story about how world making happens in 
animation because animation creates, invokes, and adapts worlds in a wide 
variety of ways, there are moments in the history of animation when the 
stakes became particularly high concerning animation’s ability to make, 
change, or record the world. 


War of the Worlds: Political Utopianism, Play, and the Plasmatic 
Image 


In the wake of World War II, in which participants on all sides made use 
of animation for propaganda purposes, some film critics reflecting on 
the politics of the image viewed the relationship between animation and 
live-action cinema as something akin to a war of the worlds. In the early 
19908, for example, French film critic Serge Daney (1944-1992) reflects on 
his personal film history and recalls: 


Captivated by cinema, I didn’t need—as well—to be seduced. No need 
either for baby talk. As a child I had never seen any Disney movies |...] 
Worse: for me, animated movies would always be something other than 
cinema. Even worse: animated movies would always be a bit the enemy. 
No “beautiful image,” especially drawn, would match the emotion—fear 
and trembling—in front of recorded things. (Daney [1992] 2004) 


In Stanley Cavell’s influential meditation on the nature of cinema’s relation 
to the physical world, The World Viewed: Reflections on the Ontology of Film, 
the American philosopher again privileges the recorded over the drawn 
image.’ First published in 1971, this book defines cinema as “a succession 


256 WORLD BUILDING 


of automatic world projections” (Cavell 1979, 167). For Cavell, cinematic 
projections differ from the world itself primarily for temporal reasons. 
Through viewing the projections of a past world, he suggests, film specta- 
tors can heighten their awareness of the existence of a world that exists 
always and necessarily beyond the self. After asking, “What does the silver 
screen screen?” he responds, “It screens me from the world it holds—that 
is, makes me invisible. And it screens that world from me—that is, screens 
its existence from me. That the projected world does not exist (now) is its 
only difference from reality” (ibid., 24). 

Three years after this book’s publication, Alexander Sesonske published 
a response to The World Viewed that asked where Walt Disney’s projected 
animated worlds might fit into Cavell’s theory of cinema. The short answer 
is that, for Cavell, they don’t really, but, in a lengthy postscript added to the 
1979 (expanded) reprint of the book, Cavell attempts to explain why this is 
the case. He declares that the region of animated cartoons “has nothing to 
do with projections of the real world” (ibid., 167).8 While he acknowledges 
that there is “no general problem of achieving conviction in such a world” 
(ibid.,169), he notes that, because there seem to be “no real laws at all” in 
the world of animation and because cartoon characters seem to “avoid, or 
deny, the metaphysical facts of human beings” (ibid., 171), cartoons cannot 
convince viewers that they have arisen, as Cavell suggests real “movies” do, 
“from below the world” (ibid., 170, 39).* While movies are, in an ontological 
sense, of the world, animated cartoons are merely in it. 

Therefore, although Cavell allows that cartoons “are successions of 
animated world projections’, he rejects outright Sesonske’s suggestion that 
Hollywood films and cartoons are “not that different” (ibid., 173). At most, 
Cavell allows that cartoons constitute “a child’s world” that “remains an 
ineluctable substratum of our own, and subject to deliberate or unlooked 
for eruption” (ibid., 169). Although, as the book’s title suggests, Cavell is 
interested in the relationship of movies to a world that he understands as 
singular in nature, this brief moment, an animated moment, shows Cavell 
acknowledging a human subject that moves in and through different worlds, 
or perhaps that distinct worlds move in and through the human subject. 
For film theorists, animation seems to render these movements between 
worlds more visible and more available to consciousness. 

In the period between the first and second world wars, film and media 
theorists in Europe explored the idea that cartoons might catalyze or affect 
change in the so-called “real world’, in part because of their ability to high- 
light the traffic between the shared space of the audience and individual 
spectators’ inner worlds.’ World War I had tempered much of the previous 


THE WORRIES OF THE WORLD(S) 257 


century’s belief in technological utopias. Yet, for some media theorists in 
the late 1920s and early 1930s, cartoon animation’s multiple renderings 
of the world (or worlds), its penchant for metamorphosis, and the playful 
attitude it tended to induce in spectators of “animation” still appeared 
to have the potential to foster viewers’ openness to alternative ways of 
structuring the world. Animation, some argued, and cartoon animation in 
particular, has the potential to cultivate the political imagination of mass 
audiences through its acts of comic invention; its endless stretching and 
squashing of time, space and bodies; and its creation of characters that 
function as collective dream spaces. Such utopian and, at times, revolution- 
ary claims regarding animation’s ability to remake the world did not arise 
randomly. They occurred in specific historical circumstances, often in 
desperate conditions of extreme poverty and violence where bodies, the 
physical landscapes they inhabit, and the laws that governed both, were 
being threatened, destroyed, and technologically rebuilt. 

Animators can suck viewers into alternative realities that often fore- 
ground, then mess with, perceived boundaries between form and formless- 
ness, life and death, human and non-human, possible and impossible, the 
world(s) we know and the ones we don’t. In our own time, we might think, 
for example, of Hayao Miyazaki’s My Neighbor Totoro and Spirited Away, 
which both depict children’s ability to access magical spirit worlds that are 
largely unavailable to the films’ adult characters; or Peter Lord and Nick 
Park’s Chicken Run, in which a group of chickens refuse the fate assigned to 
them by humans and become politically active, which, queer theorist Jack 
Halberstam suggests, offers no less than “a Gramscian structure of coun- 
terhegemony engineered by organic (chicken) intellectuals” (Halberstam 
2011, 32). While the political possibilities Halberstam finds in Chicken Run 
largely concern narrative structure, character, and plot resolution rather 
than anything specific about animation aesthetics, many of the earlier 
utopian discussions about animation’s world-changing capacities focus on 
particular audiovisual aesthetic experiments that often predate and even 
resist the use of animation for feature-length narrative films. 

Walt Disney's Snow White and the Seven Dwarfs represents a punctuation 
point in this early debate about cartoon animation’s radical potential. While 
earlier forms of animation had been notable primarily for their celebra- 
tion of freedom from fixed form, after Snow White, Esther Leslie suggests, 
feature-length animated films: 


reinstitute the laws of perspective and gravity, and lead a fight against 
flatness, while producing traditional dramaturgical characters. They 


258 WORLD BUILDING 


no longer appear to explode the world with the surrealistic and analytic 
dynamite of the optical unconscious.... They distance themselves from 
the art ofthe avant-garde, which takes fragmentation and disintegration 
into its law of form, making clear how constructed not only it is but also 
the social world—ripe for transformation. (Leslie 2002, 121-1)° 


Prior to this move toward realism and away from experimental forms, 
however, radical media theorists frequently thought through early cartoons, 
which they saw as having affinities with the experimental and abstract 
work of modernist artists.” Early 20'"-century theorists focused less on 
changes at the narrative level than on the visual prevalence of mutating 
forms, as well as on the relationship of those visual forms to soundtracks. 
They considered the perceptual impact of animated “eye-music’ that altered 
audiences’ relation to the world by scrambling the traditional organization 
of sensory perception and blurring the distinction between sound and 
image.’ These kinds of experiments made animation prone to being aligned 
with revolutionary politics and social visions of total transformation. 

At times, there was a tension between animators working with modernist 
abstraction and those working within more narratively oriented paradigms. 
Walter Ruttmann, a pioneer of abstract animation, for example, asked of 
Lotte Reinigers’s cut-out fairytale, The Adventures of Prince Achmed, “What 
has this to do with 1923?” (Leslie 2002, 27). Yet the genres to which narratively 
oriented animators have been frequently drawn, such as the fairytale and 
the folktale, tend to underscore the kind of formal audiovisual surprises we 
find in non-narrative works, as when the fate or physical form of characters 
alters in unexpected and seemingly impossible ways. A similar resonance 
exists between the pioneers of animation and film slapstick. Crafton, for 
example, discusses both Walt Disney’s admiration of Buster Keaton and 
Keaton’s admiration of Winsor McCay, noting that for many early filmmakers, 
Keaton included, McCay’s animated film Gertie had done nothing less than 
“revealed the possibility of the medium” (Crafton 1982, 297 and 134).° 

In the early 2oth century, as the architectural theorist Anthony Vidler 
has pointed out, a growing awareness of inner or psychological space 
impacted how people saw, experienced, and depicted the physical world. 
Animation plays a complex role in the way modern people moved between 
the world ‘outside’ themselves and a world that was newly and increasingly 
designated as “within”. Animators like McCay both reflect and contribute 
to this changing sense of the interaction between the world and the self, 
at times depicting territories that seemed to have been physically shaped 
by the projection of interior landscapes.” As the new phenomenon of “shell 


THE WORRIES OF THE WORLD(S) 259 


shock” had demonstrated, these interior landscapes had also been shaped 
by the technologically enhanced destruction of World War I. Animation 
both responded to and was part of the modern war machine. Propaganda 
filmmakers, for example, had pioneered the strange temporality of the 
animated map in World War I, creating speculative views of the world 
designed to sway public opinion about the war by visualizing both projected 
victories and enemy invasions. Animation had thus become a vehicle for 
mass audiences and intellectuals alike to grapple with and learn to inhabit 
a changed world. 


Walter Benjamin's Foreign Bodies: Animated Dreams and 
Nightmares 


In an unpublished fragment written in 1931, the German-Jewish philosopher 
Walter Benjamin finds in Mickey Mouse a figure who renders visible how 
the war had changed the place of the body in the world. Although humor 
and play are both important aspects of Benjamin’s understanding of how 
animation shapes the worlds we inhabit, the tone of this fragment is undeni- 
ably grim.” In a world in which technological advances had first blown 
away limbs and then replaced them with mechanical prosthetics, Benjamin 
writes, “Property relations in Mickey Mouse cartoons: here we see for the 
first time that it is possible to have one’s own arm, even one’s own body, 
stolen.” “In these films”, he continues, “mankind makes preparations to 
survive civilization.” He ends the fragment by asserting, “So the explanation 
for the huge popularity of these films is not mechanization, their form; nor 
is it a misunderstanding. It is simply the fact that the public recognizes its 
own life in them” (Benjamin 1931, 545). But how exactly does the public 
either prepare to survive the civilized world or recognize itself through a 
cartoon mouse? 

Miriam Hansen, the most perceptive commentator on Benjamin’s media 
writings, is helpful here, pointing out that “ifthis somewhat counterintuitive 
conclusion is to make sense, it has to be understood not as a matter of 
representational verisimilitude but rather as referring to the films’ lending 
expression to salient aspects of modern experience through hyperbolic hu- 
mor, kinetic rhythms, and plasmatic fantasy” (Hansen 2012, 170). Benjamin 
resists the temptation to retreat into a pre-modern fantasy of a redemptive 
and technologically uncontaminated natural world, instead finding in 
Mickey Mouse a dialectical figure in which to discover both the destructive 
element of modern life and the mode of surviving it. Hansen explains that, 


260 WORLD BUILDING 


for Benjamin, “the Mickey Mouse films engage technology not as an external 
force, in a literal or formal rendering of ‘mechanization, but as a hidden 
figure: they hyperbolize the historical imbrication of nature and technology 
through humor and parody” (ibid., 174). She continues, “While mechanically 
produced, the miracles of the animated cartoon seem improvised out of 
the bodies and objects on the screen, in a freewheeling exchange between 
animate and inanimate worlds’ (ibid., 174). 

While some film and media theorists fetishize the differences between 
animation and live-action films, Hansen suggests that “Benjamin bypasses 
the hierarchy oflive-action over animated film fostered by Hollywood? (ibid, 
p-175). For him, she argues, the bodies of Mickey Mouse and the screen actor 
are both examples of moving images that complicate our understanding 
of the relationship between human beings and things within the modern 
world. Reading across a variety of texts by Benjamin, Hansen draws com- 
parisons between the functions of the screen actor, the cartoon character, 
and the strange characters in Franz Kafka’s writing for whom the body 
itself becomes the “most forgotten alien territory” (ibid., 177). She suggests 
that, for Benjamin, these examples both allegorically render the alienating 
conditions of life under modernity visible, and present a utopian possibility 
for surviving the paradoxical condition of the self as itself a foreign world. 

Benjamin most explicitly theorizes how the utopian aspect of Mickey 
Mouse might work in the first version of his essay, “The Work of Art in the 
Age of Its Reproducibility”, composed in 1935 in Paris and then revised for 
publication in 1936. His position here is clearly speculative, a maneuver 
on the part of a writer who would see fewer and fewer options in the face 
of fascist violence. This narrowing would eventually result in his leaving 
the world through suicide in 1938. Play, long important to Benjamin, and 
closely related to both animation and slapstick in its world-making and 
world-bending possibilities, takes on a heavy charge in the artwork essay. 
In 1928, Benjamin had already suggested a number of important functions 
of play in relation to the possibility for a human subject to be in the world. 
Repetitious play with things, Benjamin suggests, enables the subject to 
“gain possession of ourselves”, to “transcend ourselves in love and enter into 
the life and the often alien rhythm of another human being”, and finally, 
to transform “a shattering experience into habit” through its repetition 
(Benjamin 1928, SW 2.1, 117-121; 120). 

Turning his attention to film, Benjamin saw the film camera as a tech- 
nology that both renders visible “hidden details in familiar objects” and 
“manages to assure us of a vast and unsuspected field of play [Spielraum]’. 
Through it, he claims, “we first discover the optical unconscious” (Benjamin 


THE WORRIES OF THE WORLD(S) 261 


1935, 30). Crucially, Benjamin posits that via this optical unconscious that 
the onscreen image makes available, “the individual perceptions of the 
psychotic or the dreamer can be appropriated by the collective percep- 
tion of the audience”; and Mickey Mouse emerges alongside the onscreen 
actor as a figure of “collective dream” (ibid.,31). Just as play provided early 
training for entering into the alien world of another through love, so, he 
claimed, cartoon audiences might somehow meet in the shared dream of 
Mickey Mouse’s drawn body in ways that could redeem the world. Benjamin 
even went so far as to suggest that cartoon violence might therapeutically 
prevent real violence when he argued that the “forced development of 
sadistic fantasies or masochistic delusions can prevent their natural and 
dangerous maturation in the masses” (ibid., 31). But as Hansen points out, 
by this point in history, Benjamin “was well aware of how close the Disney 
subject could come to the spirit of fascism” (Hansen 2012, 181). He also 
understood how unpredictable the effects of laughter could be, yet he chose 
anyway to argue for, or perhaps simply to hope for, the world-saving power 
of comedy and cartoons alike: “Collective laughter is one such preemptive 
and healing outbreak of mass psychosis” (Benjamin 1935, 31). 

Benjamin understood that animation, like the repetitions of play and habit, 
contained the possibility of both happiness and horror, and that it potentially 
reinforced in subjects an acceptance of violence as inevitable (see: Benjamin 
1936, SW 3: 99-133; 130, n. 30). There has been a critical tendency to turn Ben- 
jamin into a naive, cartoon-loving caricature of himselfin contrast to the less 
optimistic position articulated by Theodor W. Adorno and Max Horkheimer in 
Dialectic of Enlightenment ([19 44] 2011), that “Donald Duck in the cartoons and 
the unfortunate victim in real life receive their beatings so that the spectators 
can accustom themselves to theirs.” But, as Hansen suggests, it is more accurate 
to maintain their “conflicting perspectives in a stereoscopic view’, not least 
because all three thinkers saw the function of cartoons in the world changing 
as cartoons themselves evolved (Hansen 2012, 163). 

Adorno and Horkheimer, for example, acknowledge that cartoons “were 
once exponents of fantasy against rationalism’, allowing “justice to be done 
to the animals and things electrified by their technology, by granting the 
mutilated beings a second life” ([1944] 2011, 1023), while Benjamin recognizes 
by 1936 “how easily fascism takes over ‘revolutionary’ innovations in this 
field too”—so much so that he chooses to revise his essay, removing much 
of the utopian material about Mickey Mouse in the process (Benjamin 
1936, SW 3: 99-133; 130, n. 30). In hindsight, Benjamin’s early invocation of 
Mickey Mouse as a collective dream might seem unrealistic and escapist, 
yet his diary entries from 1938 make clear not only that his dream-world 


262 WORLD BUILDING 


brought little escape, but also that, in his dreams as much as in his waking 
life, he explored the conditions of being and suffering in a world made 
present through the interconnectedness of sound, drawn images, writing, 
the land, and the biological body. Here it is worth noting that, as Kirsten 
Ostherr has demonstrated, since at least the late 1920s, this biological body 
was not distinct from but constructed by and understood through a hybrid 
medical moving-image practice that combined hand-drawn animations 
of cross-sections, live-action film footage of living bodies, stop-motion 
animation of cadavers undergoing dissection, and textual labels (Ostherr 
2013, 58-61). On 6 March 1938, following a dream in which he had remarked 
aloud that he “probably wouldn't live much longer”, Benjamin records, 


I’ve been suffering greatly from the noise in my room. Last night, my 
dream recorded this. I found myself standing in front of a map and, 
simultaneously, standing in the landscape which it depicted. The land- 
scape was terrifyingly dreary and bare; I couldn't have said whether its 
desolation was that of a rocky wasteland or that of an empty gray ground 
populated only by capital letters. These letters writhed and curved on 
their terrain as iffollowing mountain ranges; the words they formed were 
approximately equidistant from one another. I knew or learned that I 
was in the labyrinth of my auditory canal. But the map was, at the same 
time, a map of hell (Benjamin 1938, SW 3: 335-6). 


There is a critical tendency to discuss animation’s relation to the world in 
terms of mimesis and realism, yet this frame persistently returns us to the 
same question of how effectively animation recreates a world that pre-dates 
it, and this time line may be limited in what it can reveal about how lived 
worlds are made. Benjamin’s diary entry here offers a view of the world 
coming into human consciousness through the intertwining of dreams, 
perception, matter and thought. As graphic images and words become 
entangled with the physical earth on which we stand and the body with 
which we do the standing, the world makes itself felt. 


Sergei Eisenstein and the Quest for Freedom 


Hansen sees similarities between Benjamin’s somewhat excessive response 
to Mickey Mouse and “[Sergei] Eisenstein’s obsession with Disney’s fire 
imagery in The Moth and the Flame” (Hansen 2012, 180). For both writers, 
animation becomes a conceptual vehicle for rejecting a notion of the world 


THE WORRIES OF THE WORLD(S) 263 


as fixed and fully made. The formal traits of Disney’s animation provide a 
scaffolding that enables the imagination and articulation of the possibility 
of radical change. Writing a few years later than Benjamin, in 1940-1941, 
Eisenstein’s writing on Disney also emerges in fragmentary form at this 
moment when his status as a filmmaker under Stalin was most uncertain. 

In 1940, the year Eisenstein began writing about Disney, he was working 
primarily ona production of Wagner’s Die Walküre at the Bolshoi Opera and 
it is clear that his writing on animation is inflected by this operatic context. 
Echoing Benjamin’s earlier utopian writing about cartoons, Eisenstein dis- 
covers in the fluid form of Disney’s drawn animated characters an ecstasy 
and lack of stability, shared by fire and music, that he describes as “a sensing 
and experiencing of the primal ‘omnipotence’—the element of ‘coming into 
being’—the ‘plasmaticness’ of existence, from which everything can arise” 
(Eisenstein 1988, 46). For Eisenstein, drawing on Heraclitus, Hegel, and Lenin, 
animation’s resonance with fire and ecstasy puts it in a category of phenom- 
ena that capture primal experiences of “coming into being’--including the 
coming into being of the world itself—experiences that at once exceed the 
capacity of the image and yearn to be captured. “Thus”, Eisenstein argues, 
“there will be phenomena with poly-formic capabilities.” In a fragment that 
turns to Engels, Eisenstein sees to underscore that this dynamism is not 
separate from a physical world understood as a finite thing but is instead an 
integral but fluid component of “the unity of the whole system of the world” 
(ibid., 47). Eisenstein grapples with the seemingly irresistible “attractiveness” 
of this “plasmaticness”, a quality through which a “being of a definite form” 
is “capable of assuming any form” (ibid., 21). In part because his writing on 
animation appears in the form of fragments rather than a completed text, 
Eisenstein is perhaps too easily associated (both positively and negatively) 
by contemporary critics with an oversimplified view of animation’s ability 
to realize freedom in the world through formal play alone. 

Yet, in response to the question of who would be attracted to the flame’s 
endless mutability of form, Eisenstein answers, “He, of course, who more 
than anyone else, lacks its fascinating traits: and foremost—freedom of 
movement, freedom of transformation, freedom of the elements” (ibid., 
30). He goes on to note that “a passion for fire”, an element completely 
intertwined with drawn animation in this essay, “is characteristic for 
regressive conditions and is so well-known in psychiatry, that there even 
exists a special euphonious term for it—‘pyromania” (ibid., 31). In recent 
years, scholars have returned with renewed interest in Eisenstein’s theory 
of the plasmatic as they attempt to understand the overlooked importance 
of fluid forms to film history in the age of the “digital morph”. But these 


264 WORLD BUILDING 


returns frequently highlight the utopian dimensions of Eisenstein’s writing 
on mobile forms without noting his insistence that the attraction of such 
forms emerges only in times and places where constraints on freedom 
have all but extinguished life itself. Though he mentions modern America 
and eighteenth century Japan as examples of repressive contexts, his own 
attraction to these forms implies that the Soviet Union under Stalin is not 
exempt from his critique: 


In a country and social order with such a mercilessly standardized and 
mechanically measured existence, which is difficult to call life, the sight 
ofsuch “omnipotence” (that is, the ability to “become whatever you wish’), 
cannot but hold a sharp degree of attractiveness. This is as true for the 
United States as it is for the petrified canons of world-outlook, art and 
philosophy of eighteenth-century Japan. (ibid., 21) 


Eisenstein pursues with interest the aesthetic possibilities of these protean 
forms, including their ability to bring about new correspondences between 
sound and image (ibid., 64-66), and to access a “pre-logical” part of the psyche 
that is capable of overriding logical objections to “belief” in these omnipotent 
creatures and the worlds to which they belong. He writes, for example, 


We know that they are... drawings and not living beings. We know that 
they are... projections of drawings on a screen. We know that they are... 
“miracles” and tricks of technology, that such beings don’t really exist. 
But at the same time: We sense them as alive. We sense them as moving, 
as active. We sense them as existing and even thinking! (ibid., 55) 


There is a wonder and ecstasy that Disney’s animations inspire in Eisenstein, 
even as he recognizes that, during the war, they “become utilitarian—in- 
structionally technical” (ibid., 65). Yet, for him, the spectator’s attraction 
to the plasmatic remains rooted in “the world around the author—an 
inhuman world’, a world of social constraint (ibid., 10)."” 


Imperfect Tense: Animation in the Age of the Anthropocene 


Writing in 1948, in the wake of World War II, French film critic André Bazin 
celebrates those writers and filmmakers whose personal style within a work 
did not alter the “chemical composition’ of “the facts” of the physical, material 
world that he conceptualizes (as Cavell would later do) in terms of “the law of 


THE WORRIES OF THE WORLD(S) 265 


gravity”. Within this postwar context, animation’s capacity to build worlds 
might come to seem like interference with the “fact” of the world, or even 
deception, but, as I have argued elsewhere, it is important not only to read 
such Bazinian moments in the historically specific context of World War II 
propaganda, but also to recall Bazin’s wonder at and interest in the worlds 
that Walt Disney conjured up (Beckman 2014, 177-197). The “image fact” is 
central to Bazin’s sense ofan ethical postwar cinema. The human constitutes 
one, but only one of these “facts” in the world, and for Bazin, the human view 
of things is held in check by the presence of a whole other material reality 
within a film: “Man himself is just one fact among others, to whom no pride 
of place should be given a priori” (Bazin 2005, 31). Yet, almost 70 years later, 
some scientists suggest a change in the relationship between the human 
“fact” and the geological materiality of the world. While the International 
Commission on Stratigraphy and the International Union of Geological 
Sciences still subscribes to the idea that we are currently in the Holocene, a 
geological epoch of warmth that began 11,700 years ago after the last ice age, 
in 2000, there is increasing interest in the suggestion of atmospheric chemist 
Paul Cruzen and others that we are now in the age of the Anthropocene, in 
which humans function as a geological force (Stromberg 2013). 

Does animation still play a role, as it did in the 1930s, in collective efforts to 
imagine how we might contain our self-generated forces of destruction? The 
realm of animated data provides one interesting example of the reemergence 
of a salvational mode of image-making. Within the environmental context, 
we might look at the HeadsUP! Project, founded by digital media artist Peggy 
Weil, which invites designers to visualize critical global issues for display on 
a 19,000 square foot digital signboard in New York’s Times Square. In 2012, 
for example, designer Richard Vijgen developed an animated map that drew 
data from the GRACE (Gravity Recovery and Climate Experiment) mission 
to visualize the alarming rate of changing ground water levels worldwide.” 
While these animations can seem like direct appeals from the belly of the 
earth to human vision, these images emerge out of, and therefore also assert, 
what Lisa Parks has called “vertical power’, reflecting the uneven distribution 
of privacy, as well as of access to data about everything from fluctuating 
natural resources to migrating bodies.”° 

While Cavell and Bazin treasured the cinematic image for its projection 
of a world-that-has-been at a specific time and place, animated data images 
often condense and systematize continuous pasts into legible patterns that 
can become the basis for future predictions about the world. Animation 
has the capacity to evoke something akin to the imperfect tense by visual- 
izing experiences that shape our sense of the world because they repeat 


266 WORLD BUILDING 


continuously. In its ability to convey the routine time and actions that 
often undergird structural forms of violence that, in their repetitions, fail 
to meet the criteria of the newsworthy event, animation has the potential 
to disrupt what Arielle Azoulay describes as the “general pattern of being 
on the verge of catastrophe,” a pattern to which we tend to be indifferent 
as long as death itself itself is held at bay (Azoulay 2008, 69). Although 
for Cavell, it is ultimately the cartoon character's invulnerability to death 
that renders animation not of this world, there is a resonance between the 
worst of our world and the absence of death that desperately requires more 
animated thought and action. 


Notes 


1. Fora discussion of the importance of animation to European filmmakers in 
the postwar period, particularly the French filmmakers Alain Resnais and 
Chris Marker, see: Karen Beckman, “Animating the Cinéfils”. Sada Niang 
highlights the “shortsightedness” of the marginalization of Moustapha Alas- 
sane from postcolonial African film history. Niang draws attention to Alas- 
sane’s use of animation for political satire in films such as Bon Voyage Sim 
(1966), noting the exemplary nature of these films in relation to the FEPACI 
Charter. See: Nationalist African Cinema, 91-104, especially 94-95. 

2. Cavell builds on the work of the German art historian Erwin Panofsky (1892- 
1968) and French film critic André Bazin (1918-1958) among others. 

3- While “cinematic animation” is often considered to be something like the 
opposite of photo-based, live-action cinema, Tom Gunning follows D. N. 
Rodowick in pointing out that “animating drawings in classical animation 
involves photographing them onto a filmstrip’, going on to add that “Even 
animation that employs drawing and painting directly on the filmstrip, 
often called cameraless animation [...] commonly involves the making of a 
projection print through photographic processes. Thus, at the minimum, 
most animation requires photography as a means of mechanical reproduc- 
tion.” See: Gunning, p. 37-38. 

4. Although there are great difference between the attitudes of Donald 
Crafton and Stanley Cavell to animation’s relation to the world and world 
making, the two meet, I think, around this idea of what Cavell calls “convic- 
tion” and Crafton calls “belief”. 

5. Fora discussion of how early Disney shaped early theories of film realism 
and possible worlds in Japan, see: Lamarre. 

6. Leslie also points out that Snow White initiates a moment of transformation 
in the world of animation production, causing Disney to “massify produc- 
tion’, open a “24-hour factory of distraction production’, and adapt “Fordist 
methods”. 


THE WORRIES OF THE WORLD(S) 267 


10. 


1. 


12. 


13. 


14. 


15. 


16. 


17. 
18. 


Donald Crafton provides one of the best histories of early animation in 
Before Mickey: The Animated Film 1898-1928, Cambridge: MIT Press, 1982. 
Early pioneers of “visual music” or “eye music” include Bruno Corra, 
Arnaldo Ginna, Bernhard Diebold, Walter Ruttman, Hans Richter, Oskar 
Fischinger, and Viking Eggeling. Important later figures include Len Lye, 
Norman McLaren, and the Whitney Brothers. See: Raphäel Bassan, “Cinema 
and Abstraction: From Bruno Corra to Hugo Verlinde, Senses of Cinema (De- 
cember 2011): http://sensesofcinema.com/2011/feature-articles/cinema-and- 
abstraction-from-bruno-corra-to-hugo-verlinde/; Esther Leslie, Hollywood 
Flatlands, 47; Robert Russett and Cecile Starr, Experimental Animation: 
Origins of a New Art, revised edition (New York: Da Capo, 1976): 32-71, 163- 
177; and the Center for Visual Music: http://www.centerforvisualmusic.org. 
Scott Bukatman also notes the unruly affinities among comic strips, car- 
toons, and slapstick comedy. See: Bukatman, 3, 26, 40, and chapter 4. 

For a discussion of Anthony Vidler’s study of “warped space” and its 
relevance to changing modes of spatial representation in animation, see: 
Telotte, chapter 2, especially 48-50. For a discussion of McCay’s subjective 
and objective drawn worlds, see: Bukatman, chapter 1. 

Although Mickey Mouse made his first proper screen appearances in 
Steamboat Willie (1928) and Plane Crazy (1929), Crafton points out that this 
animated star, who began life as Mortimer Mouse, is only one of a series 

of “similar-looking rodents [who] had romped through the 1920s animated 
films drawn by Terry, Messmer, Nolan, and Disney himself”. Crafton, 295. 
Elsewhere Hansen describes the audience’s self-recognition in Mickey as 
being rooted in the cartoon’s ‘graphic evocation of recognizable elements of 
modern experience’, 201. 

Esther Leslie discusses the relationship between Walt Disney and Leni 
Riefenstahl in Leslie 2002, 123-157. 

Jay Leyda notes that Eisenstein often turned to “theoretical work that did 
not depend on administrative approval” at those moments when attempts 
to advance film projects were frustrated by the Soviet film industry. See: 
Leyda, 1983, 360. 

The new significance of morphing to visual culture is highlighted in Sob- 
chack, ed. 2000. 

Rosalind Krauss represents one exception to this trend. She notes that, 
“Disney’s ‘plasmaticness’ may [...] not be a twentieth-century version of the 
phenomenon of fire or the primitive idea of animism but, instead, an ana- 
logue of the principle of universal equivalence that reigns at the heart of 
capital.” While Krauss shares and develops Eisenstein’s sense of the negative 
dimensions of the plasmatic, she may also underestimate Eisenstein’s own 
awareness of this in his writing. See: Krauss 2005, 108. 

On the dialectical nature of the plasmatic, see also: Bukatman 2012, 21. 
Stromberg 2013 points out that those scientists who subscribe to this idea 
debate this epoch’s starting point. 


268 WORLD BUILDING 


19. This video can be seen here: https://vimeo.com/42607107. Sarah C. Rich 
provides a detailed discussion of the project in “Groundwater, Gravity, and 
Graphic Design,” http://www.smithsonianmag.com/arts-culture/ground- 
water-gravity-and-graphic-design-92023106/. For Chris Poulson’s animation 
of the GRACE data for the National Drought Mitigation Center, see: https:// 
www.youtube.com/watch?v=nddXeGhZmbk&feature=youtu.be. For a 
detailed discussion of the technology used to measure the groundwater 
changes, see: Riebeek 2012. 

20. See: Parks 2013; see also: Parks, forthcoming; see also: Kaplan, Loyer, and 
Claytan Daniels 2013, 418. 


Works Cited 


Adorno, Theodor W.; and Horkheimer, Max. [1944] 2011. Dialectic of Enlightenment. 
Excerpted In: Critical Visions in Film Theory: Classical and Contemporary Read- 
ings, edited by Timothy Corrigan, Meta Mazaj, and Patricia White, 1015-1031. 
Boston: Bedford / St. Martin’s. 

Azoulay, Arielle. 2008. The Civil Contract of Photography. New York: Zone Books. 

Bassan, Raphiel. 2011. “Cinema and Abstraction: From Bruno Corra to Hugo 
Verlinde,” Senses of Cinema 61 (December). http://sensesofcinema.com/2011/ 
feature-articles/cinema-and-abstraction-from-bruno-corra-to-hugo-verlinde/. 

Bazin, André. 2005. “An Aesthetic of Reality: Neorealism (Cinematic Realism and 
the Italian School of the Liberation).” In: What Is Cinema?, Volume 2, edited 
and translated by Hugh Gray, 16-40. Berkeley: University of California Press. 

Beckman, Karen. 2014. “What Cinema Wasn't: Animating Film Theory’s Double 
Blind Spot.” In: Theory Aside, edited by Jason Potts and Daniel Stout, 177-197. 
Durham: Duke UP. 

—. 2015. “Animating the Cinéfils: Alain Resnais and the Cinema of Discovery,” 
Cinema Journal 54.4 (Summer), 1-25. 

Benjamin, Walter. 1931. “Mickey Mouse.” In: Selected Writings, 4 vols. edited by Mi- 
chael W. Jennings et al., translated by Rodney Livingstone, Edmund Jephcott, H. 
Eiland, et al., 545-6. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1996-2003, vol. 2.2. 

—. 1928. “Toys and Play: Marginal Notes on a Monumental Work.” In: Selected 
Writings, 4 vols. edited by Michael W. Jennings et al., translated by Rodney 
Livingstone, Edmund Jephcott, H. Eiland, et al., Cambridge, MA: Harvard 
University Press, 1996-2003, vol. 2.1, 117-121. 

—. 1935. “The Work of Art in the Age of Its Mechanical Reproducibility [First 
Version].” Grey Room 39 (Spring 2010), translated by Michael W Jennings, 11-37. 
http://www.mitpressjournals.org/doi/pdf/10.1162/grey.2010.1.39.11. 


THE WORRIES OF THE WORLD(S) 269 


—.1936. “The Work of Art in the Age of Its Mechanical Reproducibility [Second 
Version].” In: Selected Writings, 4 vols. edited by Michael W. Jennings et al., trans- 
lated by Rodney Livingstone, Edmund Jephcott, H. Eiland, et al., Cambridge, 
MA: Harvard University Press, 1996-2003, vol. 3, 99-133. 

—. “Diary Entries’ (1938). In: Selected Writings, 4 vols. edited by Michael W. Jennings 
et al., translated by Rodney Livingstone, Edmund Jephcott, H. Eiland, et al., 
Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1996-2003, vol. 3, 335-6. 

Buchan, Suzanne. 2014. “Animation, in Theory.” In: Animating Film Theory, edited 
by Karen Beckman, 111-127. Durham: Duke UP. 

Buchan, Suzanne. 2013. “Introduction: Pervasive Animation.” In: Pervasive Anima- 
tion, edited by Suzanne Buchan, 1-21, New York: Routledge / AFI. 

Bukatman, Scott. 2012. The Poetics of Slumberland: Animated Spirits and the Animat- 
ing Spirit, Berkeley: University of California Press. 

Cavell, Stanley. 1979. The World Viewed. Enlarged edition. Cambridge, MA: Harvard 
University Press. 

Crafton, Donald. 1982. Before Mickey: The Animated Film 1898-1928, Cambridge: 
MIT Press. 

Daney, Serge. [1992] 2004. “The Tracking Shot in Kapo,” translated by Laurent 
Kretzschmar, Senses of Cinema 30: n.p. http://sensesofcinema.com/2004/feature- 
articles/kapo_daney/. Accessed June 2, 2015. First published in Trafic. 

Eisenstein, Sergei. 1988. Eisenstein on Disney, edited by Jay Leyda, translated 
by Alan Upchurch. Eisenstein series, volume 3, edited by Jay Leyda, London: 
Methuen. 

Griffin, George. 2013. “Take the B train: Reconstructing the Proto-cinematic Ap- 
paratus.” In Pervasive Animation, edited by Suzanne Buchan, 275-291. New 
York: Routledge / AFI. 

Gunning, Tom. 2014. “Animating the Instant.” In: Animating Film Theory, edited 
by Karen Beckman, 37-53. Durham: Duke UP. 

Halberstam, Judith. 2011. The Queer Art of Failure, Durham: Duke University Press. 

Hansen, Miriam. 2012. Cinema and Experience: Siegfried Kracauer, Walter Benjamin, 
and Theodor W. Adorno, Berkeley: University of California Press. 

Kaplan, Caren; Loyer, Erik; and Claytan Daniels, Ezra. 2013. “Precision Targets: GPS 
and the Militarization of Everyday Life,” Canadian Journal of Communication, 
Vol. 38: 397-420. 

Krauss, Rosalind. 2005. “‘The Rock’: William Kentridge’s Drawings for Projection.” 
In: The Sharpest Point: Animation at the End of Cinema, edited by Chris Gehman 
and Steve Reinke, 96-125. Ottawa: YY Books. 

Lamarre, Thomas. 2014. “Cartoon Film Theory: Imamura Tahei on Animation, 
Documentary, and Photography.” In: Animating Film Theory, edited by Karen 
Beckman, 221-251. Durham: Duke UP. 


270 WORLD BUILDING 


Leslie, Esther. 2002. Hollywood Flatlands: Animation, Critical Theory and the Avant- 
Garde New York: Verso. 

Leyda, Jay. 1983. Kino: A History of the Russian and Soviet Film, Princeton: Princeton 
UP. First printed 1960. 

Niang, Sada. 2014. Nationalist African Cinema: Legacy and Transformations, 
Lanham, MD: Lexington Books. 

Ostherr, Kirsten. 2013. Medical Visions: Producing the Patient Through Film, Televi- 
sion, and Imaging Technologies, New York: Oxford University Press. 

Parks, Lisa. 2013. “Earth Observation and Signal Territories: Studying U.S. Broadcast 
Infrastructure through Historical Network Maps, Google Earth, and Fieldwork,” 
Canadian Journal of Communication, Vol. 38: 285-307. 

—. Forthcoming. “Vertical Mediation: Geospatial Imagery and the US Wars 
in Afghanistan and Iraq.” In: Susan Main, Julie Cupples, et. al., eds., Media 
Geographies / Geographies of Media. 

Reinke, Steve. 2005. “The World is a Cartoon: Stray Notes on Animation.” In: The Sharp- 
est Point, edited by Chris Gehman and Steve Reinke, 9-25. Toronto and Ottawa: 
YYZ Books and Images Festival/Ottawa: Ottawa International Animation Festival. 

Rich, Sarah C. 2012. “Groundwater, Gravity, and Graphic Design,” Smithsonian. 
org, http://www.smithsonianmag.com/arts-culture/groundwater-gravity-and- 
graphic-design-92023106/. 

Riebeek, Holli. 2012. “The Gravity of Water,” Earth Observatory, http://earthobserva- 
tory.nasa.gov/Features/GRACEGroundwater/. 

Russett, Robert and Starr, Cecile. 1976. Experimental Animation: Origins of a New 
Art. Revised edition, New York: Da Capo. 

Sobchack, Vivian, (ed.). 2000. eMeta-Morphing: Visual Transformation and the 
Culture of Quick-Change, Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press. 

Stromberg, Joseph. 2013. “What is the Anthropocene and Are We In It?,” Smith- 
sonian.org, http://www.smithsonianmag.com/science-nature/what-is-the- 
anthropocene-and-are-we-in-it-164801414/. 

Telotte, Jay P. 2010. Animating Space: From Mickey to Wall.e, Lexington: University 
of Kentucky Press. 


Media Cited 


Chicken Run, 2000. Nick Park and Peter Lord. Glendale, CA: DreamWorks Anima- 
tion, 2000. DVD. 

Gertie, Windsor McCay. 1914. New York City: eOne Films. 2004. DVD. 

My Neighbor Totoro. Hayao Miyazaki. 1988. Burbank, CA: Walt Disney Home 
Entertainment, 2013. DVD and Blu-Ray. 


THE WORRIES OF THE WORLD(S) 271 


Snow White and the Seven Dwarfs. Walt Disney. 1937. Burbank, CA: Walt Disney 
Studio Entertainment, 2001. DVD. 

Spirited Away. Hayao Miyazaki. 2001. Burbank, CA: Disney/Buena Vista, 2015. 
Blu-Ray. 

The Adventures of Prince Achmed, Lotte Reiniger. 1926. Chatsworth, CA: Image 
Entertainment, 2002. DVD. 


About the author 


Karen Redrobe (formerly Beckman) is the Elliot and Roslyn Jaffe Professor 

of Cinema and Modern Media and Chair of the Department of the History 
of Art at the University of Pennsylvania. She is the author of Vanishing 

Women: Magic, Film and Feminism and Crash: Cinema and the Politics of 
Speed and Stasis; co-editor of Still Moving: Between Cinema and Photography 

and On Writing With Photography; and editor of Animating Film Theory. She 

is currently working on a new book project entitled, Undead: Animation and 
the Contemporary Art of War. 


15. 


Linguistic Terrain and World Time 
Chinese Media Theories and Their World Imaginations 


Victor Fan 


Boni, Marta (ed.), World Building. Transmedia, Fans, Industries. Amster- 
dam University Press, 2017 


DOI: 10.5117/9789089647566/CH15, 


Abstract 

Media as an instrument of world (re)making has been the focus of critical 
discourses on media in China since the 1940s. As Haun Saussy argues, Euro- 
American colonial and, later on, global discourses since the mid-nineteenth 
century have often constructed “China” and the “World” as two imaginary 
poles that are fundamentally different in concepts of historical temporality, 
geopolitical spatiality, and culturo-linguistic subjectivity. In this light, how 
media could mediate the relationship between these two imaginary poles 
becomes a crucial question in many theoretical discussions. In recent years, 
a key conceptual framework that shapes the debate in Chinese academic 
studies of media is “yujing” (linguistic terrain): an imagination of the world 
today as a global economy of gift exchange, which consists of overlapping 
and, at times, mutually contesting linguistic environments that require 
remediation. Interestingly, between 1942 and 1945, media theorist Sun 
Mingjing proposed a temporal model of studying world media by consider- 
ing international mediation as a gradual process of constructing a sense 
of world rhythm called shijie shi (world time). In this chapter, I conduct a 
comparative reading of these two modes of Chinese media theory: one on 
spatiality and the other on temporality. I argue that these two models are 
symptomatic ofa semicolonial and, later on, postcolonial, desire to rewrite 
the imaginary gap between “China” and the “World.” 


Keywords: Chinese media theory, Sun Mingjing, Media and world order, 
Sino-Japanese War and Media, Yujing or linguistic terrain 


As seen in the previous chapters, contemporary media offers an assem- 


blage of interconnected and interactive sites in which new imaginations 


LINGUISTIC TERRAIN AND WORLD TIME 273 


and alternative notions of the world are proposed, fabricated, and ne- 
gotiated. It also re-configures the epistemological space(s) in which the 
idea of a world could be conceived or understood. Besides the fictional 
level, media, as technics, directly reconfigures the relationship between 
human beings and the world. This world, as a set of spatiotemporal 
coordinates, redefines what it means to be human (Stiegler 1998 [1994], 
29-42). According to Heidegger (1996 [1953], 79), for example, human be- 
ings distinguish themselves from animals as the former become aware of 
death and the time it takes for one to die. Meanwhile, the divide between 
humanity and divinity is often understood as one between temporality/ 
mortality and atemporality/immortality (Agamben 2004, 11-12; Stiegler 
1998 [1994], 191). In this sense, human beings are often considered to 
stand for nomos (order) as opposed to phusis (nature—divine or animal) 
(Agamben, 2004, 11-12). However, as Bernard Stiegler (1998 [1994], 194-195) 
argues, the anticipation of death comes hand-in-hand with the human 
need to produce in order to survive (as opposed to the divine for whom 
sustenance is always provided). In this sense, the invention of tools and 
technology and the awareness of temporality—together with society, 
gender difference, and class—all emerge at the same time as attributes 
of humanity. Yet, the very concept of human beings as technical beings 
had not been widely acknowledged until recent years, as social media 
and personalized computing technology (e.g. the smartphone) began to 
make us aware that we are not operators of technology. Rather, we are 
constituted by technology itself. 

This chapter seeks to examine the concept of media as a world-building 
device, with the theoretical discourses developed in China as our case 
study. I treat media (in its singular form) not as a set or network of media 
(plural), but as a technological, social, ideological, economic, and discursive 
apparatus that constitutes, informs, and mediates our mode of existence. 
Despite the fact that these theories emerged out of the specific sociopolitical 
conditions of China, they actively reexamine the role media plays in world 
making through a cross-cultural semantic field between Euro-America 
and China. These theories also address the question of how technology 
redefines the relationship between human beings and time, an aporia 
scrutinized by European philosophers including Gilbert Simondon (2015 
[1958]), Bernard Stiegler (1998 [1994]), Peter Sloterdijk (2004, 40-44), and 
Brian Massumi (2009, 36-45). 

Media as an instrument of world making has been the focus of criti- 
cal debates in China since the 1940s. Between 1942 and 1945, fleeing the 
Japanese occupation of Nanjing (Nanking), the Department of Film and 


274 WORLD BUILDING 


Radio of Nanking University evacuated to the wartime capital Chengdu 
(Chengtu) (Bao 2015, 298; Zhang 1990, 56). With sponsorship from the US 
military, its Head of Department Sun Mingjing (1911-1992) led a research 
team to investigate what he called dianhua jiaoyu (“electrified education’). 
Such research sought to use meijie (“media”) including film, television, radio, 
telegraph, chronometer, train, airplane, and a computer-like technology 
called dianhua jiyi (“electrified memory”) to break through enemy lines 
and to reconfigure the relationship between human beings and the world 
(Du 1943, 1-4; Guan 1942, 20; Sun 1943a, cover page; Sun 1943c, 4-6). For 
Sun, these forms of media offer new ways for human beings to understand 
themselves and their geopolitical relationships based on technology (Sun 
1943d, back cover). 

Reconstructing the world based on a renewed understanding of human 
beings as technical beings has never been a uniquely Chinese project. 
However, the specific semi-colonial conditions in Republican China (1911- 
1949) and its postcolonial aftermath have inspired generations of Chinese 
intellectuals to reimagine the international order. In such a new order, 
China as a nation-state could become a full member of the global com- 
munity (Brownell 1995, 44-45; Kang 2005 [1901], 1-2; Liang 2003 [1902-1906], 
53-63; Schwartz 1964, 15; Yan 1895, 1; Xu 2008, 1-2 and 12-24). In the 1940s, 
for Sun (1942, 2-9; 1943a, 3; 1943b, 15; 1943c, 4-6; 1943d, back cover) and his 
cohort Li Xiaofang (1943, 5-9), the world would be best reconceptualized as 
a spatiotemporal configuration in which modernity and power (puissance) 
would no longer lie in the hands of the Euro-American nation states only. 
Rather, they would be equally shared by all humans as political lives. In 
other words, such a reconfigured world would be best understood as a set of 
spatiotemporal coordinates that actively redefine human lives as technical 
beings. Such an idea persists in Chinese scholarly discourse today in the 
form of a new keyword, yujing (“linguistic terrain”): an imagination of the 
world as a global economy of gift exchange (Ding and Wu 2009; Li 2009). In 
such an economy, human lives function as technical beings that construct 
mutually contested linguistic environments that require sociopolitical 
remediation (He, Ma, and Zhou, ed. 2008). Both media theories, I argue, 
are symptomatic of an understanding of media and its power of world 
making as a logocentric operation, which, despite its ability to overcome 
geopolitical differences, oddly maintains our ethnographic distances. Such 
an ethnocentric and logocentric view has been informed by a belief in 
colonial, postcolonial, and nationalistic discourses, which all configure 
“China” as an ethnographic and linguistic difference from the “West” (Saussy 


2007, 145-71). 


LINGUISTIC TERRAIN AND WORLD TIME 275 
Mass Mobilization and Technical Beings 


In the 1940s, Sun Mingjing proposed a model of transmedia world building 
by conceiving of media as an instrument of mass mobilization. In December 
1937, after the fall of Nanking into the hands of the Japanese army, the 
ruling Guomindang (Kuomintang, KMT, or Nationalist Party) evacuated 
the capital to Chongqing (Chungking) in southwest China. After the attack 
on Pearl Harbor in December 1941, the University of Minnesota and the 
US military helped set up the Department of Film and Radio at Nanking 
University (Bao 2015, 296-299). For Sun (1942, 2-9), the government had 
a political and ethical obligation to use media to instill a national con- 
sciousness into the sentient bodies of the bio-political lives it managed. 
This seemingly straightforward effort to turn media into an apparatus of 
wartime propaganda, I argue, had the effect of redefining human beings 
as technical beings. According to this theory, as information is constantly 
generated, shared, and mediated synchronously across different locations, 
the world as a technical assemblage has the power to overcome geopolitical 
differences (Li 1943, 5-9). Meanwhile, human beings are not operators, but 
technical beings constituted by the technical assemblage. 

Sun’s most substantial text on media theory was published on 15 Sep- 
tember 1942 in his academic journal Dianying yu boyin [Film and Radio}: 
“Dianying yu dongyuan minzhong” [Film and mobilization of the masses]. 
Sun’s writing must be understood in the context of KMT’s official policy on 
cinema as an educational tool since the mid-1920s. In 1926, the KMT faction 
led by Jiang Jieshi (Chiang Kai-shek, 1887-1975) was in exile in Guangzhou 
(Canton). Meanwhile, the rest of the country was divided into regions 
governed by local warlords or colonial authorities. Before Chiang launched 
a full-scale Northern Expedition (1926-1928) to unify the Eastern seaboard, 
the KMT established the Zhongyang xuanchuan bu (Central Department 
of Propaganda), which aimed at nationalizing the film industry. This idea 
was inspired by the political writings of Chen Gongbo (Ch’en Kung-po, 1892- 
1946). Chen believed that, in order to fight against imperialism, the Chinese 
nation should be reconfigured as a production machine. In this machine, 
biological lives should be trained and educated as guomin (nationals), who 
are best understood as technical components (Chen 1967 [1928], 39-66; Fan 
2015, 44-47; Johnson 2008, 83-156; Zanasi 2000, 125-158). 

In 1929, Chiang’s faction of the KMT established its government in Nan- 
king. In order to reconstitute Chinese cinema as an instrument of national 
education, it invited a delegation of experts from L Unione Cinematografica 
Educativa to offer experience and advice. Under the leadership of Chen 


276 WORLD BUILDING 


Lifu (Li-fu Ch’en, 1900-2001), a system of governmental committees was 
set up to oversee the production, distribution, censorship, exportation, and 
importation of films. Meanwhile, Beijing (Peking)-based theater owner 
Luo Mingyou (Lo Ming-yau, 1902-1967) initiated a merger among his own 
Huabei (Hwapeh or North China) Film Company, the Minxin (China Sun) 
Motion Picture Company, and other studios into the Lianhua Film Com- 
pany (United Photoplay Service or UPS) (Fan 2014, 44-47; Johnson 2008, 
112; “Lianhua’” 1935, 12-18; Zhong 2007, 60-64). When the KMT government 
moved to Chungking, it once again tried to consolidate its control over 
film productions by building the Zhongguo dianying zhipianchang (China 
Film Studio). It also encouraged researchers from Peking, Shanghai, and 
Nanking to conduct research in film and other media in the new capital 
(Su, Wang, Xiong, Yan, and Zhang 2009, 43-46). The immediate objective 
of such research was to foster an effective means of sharing information 
and a sense of political solidarity with the United States. It also sought 
to consolidate KMT’s control over the province of Xikang (Sikang, now 
part of Sichuan) or the Tibetan region of Kham, which was crucial for the 
India-Burma-China theater (Chen 2016). 

In “Film and Mobilization of the Masses”, Sun (1942, 2) argues that media 
“introduces a yinxiang” to the readers or viewers from the written word to 
film and television, so that “facts can be represented, thoughts can be con- 
veyed, and affects can be expressed”. The word yinxiang is usually translated 
as impression, but is better understood as an imprint. In other words, the 
most fundamental function of the media is to introduce an imprint on the 
human brain. For Sun, reading requires a reader to translate written words 
into sound, which, in turn, stimulates the brain to conjure up an impression 
of reality. Meanwhile, the radio can transmit sound directly to a listener’s 
sensorium, which allows them to transfer their audio sensation to a visual 
impression. Moving even further, cinema and television surpass these two 
“old” media by allowing the human brain to perceive an imprint of reality 
directly (Sun 1942, 2). 

For Sun, because a viewer can perceive an imprint of reality, they are able 
to withhold this impression not only as a piece of visual information, but 
also as a sensorial memory. Filmmakers should therefore take advantage 
of the fact that the impression of a lived experience lends authenticity to 
the image (Sun 1942, 3-5). In sum, Sun believes that film and television can 
directly graft an imprint of reality onto a viewer's sensorium, so that it can 
stay within the body as a physical memory (Sun 1942, 5). His media theory 
suggests that governmental authority should take advantage of audiovisual 
media to instill a consciousness into the bio-political lives it manages. Both 


LINGUISTIC TERRAIN AND WORLD TIME 277 


Bao Weihong (2015, 197-98) and I (Fan 2015, 186-87) argued, respectively, that 
such a concept of media came from a series of theoretical interventions in 
China in the 1920s and 1930s, which proposed that the cinema and other 
media were best understood as affective apparatuses. In fact, this idea 
resonates with the theoretical discussion by Walter Benjamin (2006 [1936], 
3:107-108), which was circulated among Chinese intellectuals via the Kyoto 
school of philosophy (Fan 2015, 86; Hansen 2004, 23-24; LaMarre 2010, 72-90). 
For Sun, the transmission of the imprint from the mediating body (the 
film strip or the televisual signal) to the viewer enables the physical body 
to authenticate an image. As a result, the viewer’s consciousness could 
generate critical thoughts and direct cognitive responses to the image as 
an authentic experience. 

The idea that the media is able to directly instill or reconfigure human 
consciousness suggests that human beings are not simply operators and 
users of media. Rather, they are technical beings constituted by the media. 
If so, the world as a set of spatiotemporal coordinates is not configured as 
phusis. Instead, it constitutes and is in turn constituted, by technicity (Stieg- 
ler 1998 [1994], 9-10). On 11 November 1943, physicist Li Xiaofang published 
an open letter to Sun Mingjing in Film and Radio. In this letter, Li argues 
that the most fundamental problem in media studies is the concept of time. 
In the first part of his essay, Li expounds the geographical definitions and 
properties of time. Then, in the second part, he offers a detailed calculation 
of the time difference between Washington D.C. and Chungking and the 
time it takes for a long-wave radio signal to travel between them. In the 
end, he suggests a vigorously calibrated timetable for the Chinese and US 
governments to use long-wave technology to transmit information and news 
to and from the war fronts. For our purpose, the interesting point of this 
essay is not the scientific explication, but the new worldview it suggests. 
For Li, the world is best redefined as a manifestation of technical time, as 
technology enables information and affects to be transmitted, shared, and 
mediated synchronously by technical beings across distant locations. As 
a result, new technical communities can be formed, which will trespass 
national and other geopolitical boundaries (Li 1943, 5-9). 

During the Pacific War (1941-1945), the KMT government enjoyed a short 
window of time during which the United States treated China as its equal. 
This inspired Li to rethink how media could enable its users to maintain 
and manage this new world order: 


For a philosopher, time is a natural phenomenon. For a scientist, it is the 
fourth dimension. Most common people find these ideas difficult to 


278 WORLD BUILDING 


grasp, and even specialists find them puzzling. From a practical perspec- 
tive, we can tentatively put aside these transcendental theories. Once we 
do that, the concept of time is not hard to understand. Time is, above 
all, an abstract concept. It is usually measured by means of studying a 
movement: the movement of a clock’s pendulum, the movement of the 
stars opposite Jupiter, or the movement of the flow of water in a water 
clock. What makes time unimaginable to people is the fact that it also 
drives the stillness and silence of our universe. Once movement is absent, 
it becomes difficult for us to measure time. (Li1943, 5) 


Our reliance on using movement to measure time, for Li, has the effect 
of spatializing time and all our inter-communal relationships. For Li, we 
should understand the travelling of a long-wave radio signal not in terms of 
space. Instead, it travels through, and therefore connects, a passage of time. 
The spatial difference between Washington D.C. and Chungking is, for Li, 
a temporal displacement. Therefore, media researchers should invent new 
devices to redress this displacement, and eventually reach a point at which 
the two cities can share information and political affects synchronically (Li 
1943, 9). In other words, for Li, affective differences among various technical 
beings—or more properly, technical bodies—are the results of temporal 
differences. In this sense, by overcoming temporal differences, future 
technology will be able to achieve a sense of commonality among those 
technical beings that share a mode of existence in a synchronic mediate 
(Stiegler 1998 [1994], 109). 

Li’s open letter has reached a point at which world building is no longer 
conceived in logocentric and ethnocentric terms. Yet, in response to Li’s 
open letter, Sun rearticulates this idea in a way that ethnographic differ- 
ences are reintroduced: 


After the war, even if we stay home, we will have unsolicited visitors 
coming from thousands of miles away from us. We may be called by 
our own interests or by the need of maintaining international justice to 
faraway countries. We may travel to remote regions to work, experience 
life, or entertain ourselves [...] we need to open new paths for other people 
to understand us, and likewise, we need to understand other people 
completely. We can then progress with the rest of the world and get used 
to this new environment. (Sun 19434, cover page). 


For Sun, the media has the ability to overcome temporal differences so that 
affective and geopolitical barriers could be renegotiated. However, these 


LINGUISTIC TERRAIN AND WORLD TIME 279 


new technical beings are ethnologically divided in a fundamental sense, as 
they come from different cultural communities that require “understand- 
ing” via technical mediation. Implicit in Sun’s ethnological argument is 
the idea that media ultimately overcomes culturo-linguistic differences. It 
does so by directly reconstituting the new technical beings’ sensoria. In this 
sense, language is not considered a technique that is a result of mediation. 
Rather, it is considered a biological predicate that requires mediation. 


Linguistic Terrain 


In other words, Sun’s understanding of media is ultimately confined to 
the epistemic space that defines China as an ethnographic and linguistic 
difference from the West. Such an epistemic space, ironically, is inherited by 
the national discourse today, which constantly asserts China’s exceptional- 
ism as a means to construct and reaffirm its culturo-political identity. 
This idea is articulated in the current conceptual framework in Chinese 
media studies: yujing (“linguistic terrain”). At first glance, the term yujing 
can be roughly understood as the linguistic, cultural, social, and political 
environments (Ding and Wu, eds. 2009; Li 2009). It is therefore similar to 
the Euro-American term “discourse.” Nonetheless, while the concept of a 
discourse presupposes an established linguistic topos among those parties 
who are engaged in a discussion, the idea of a linguistic terrain presumes 
the need of translation in the communication process. 

Moreover, by considering a linguistic system as a terrain, relationships 
between linguistic and cultural formations are re-displaced in spatial 
terms. For example, ever since Fredric Jameson’s visit to China in 1987, 
many Chinese scholars have considered Euro-American modernity and 
Chinese postmodernity as two linguistic terrains. For them, China had 
never attained modernity, but is now entering a process of becoming 
already-modern (Dirlik and Zhang, eds. 1997). These two temporal concepts, 
being modern and becoming already-modern, are remapped as a spatial 
relationship that mirrors the imaginary poles between Western modernity 
and Chinese para-modernity (Hey 2008, 113-32). The media is therefore 
expected to remediate the gap between these two spatialized temporalities. 

The term “linguistic terrain” is derived from the anthropological stud- 
ies of Bronistaw Malinowski (1884-1942) of the Kula ring, an institution 
of trading and gift-exchange in the French-colonial Trobriand (now the 
Kiriwina) islands. The notion was initially conceived when Malinowski 
(1920, 97-105) wrote his seminal article “Kula: The Circulating Exchange 


280 WORLD BUILDING 


of Valuables in the Archipelagos of Eastern New Guinea” for the magazine 
Man. The question at stake is: How could Malinowski, a European man, 
communicate with the “natives” when there was no linguistic commonal- 
ity among them? Malinowski’s answer is: via their linguistic context. On 
the surface, a linguistic context is the syntactical context that precedes 
and succeeds an utterance, often translated into Chinese as shangxia wen 
(“upper and lower clauses”). It can also be extended to the use of facial and 
bodily gestures that help the addressee understand what they have failed 
to comprehend verbally. 

A linguistic terrain is therefore never a self-enclosed system of significa- 
tion, as Ferdinand de Saussure would have suggested. Rather, it is closer 
to Charles Sanders Peirce’s understanding of a sign: it refers to an object 
via a representamen or mental image (Silverman 1983, 3-53). For Saussure, 
a sign is composed of a signifier (sound), which is associated with a signi- 
fied (acoustic image). However, the sign as a whole—that is, the way the 
sound and the acoustic image are associated with each other—depends 
on a system of differences that makes up language itself (Saussure 2014 
[1916], 97-113). The Saussurian model can be potentially difficult for one to 
theorize how two linguistic systems “cross-breed” in a process of transla- 
tion, especially when such a process requires the translator to understand 
how these two linguistic systems come to indicate two comparable mental 
objects. As Lydia Liu (2004, 12-13) argues, Sino-European translation during 
the nineteenth and early 2oth centuries was best understood as a process 
that threw together two signs that meant different things into a super-sign, 
a third sign that both included and exceeded the original signs. Such a 
super-sign created a juridical, political, or even cultural world order that 
was, and still is, always occupied by multiple world views. 

This representamen, for Malinowski, can constitute a linguistic terrain 
of its own. For example, in the reading of a seemingly unified text by means 
of its upper and lower clauses, a text can be divided into four texts: (1) a 
readerly text (the actual spoken or written text); (2) a readable text (parts 
of a passage that can be deciphered by the reader); (3) an absented text 
(textual gaps that the reader must infer from the readable text); and (4) a 
writerly text (the resulting text understood by the reader) (Barthes 1994 
[1974], 4-6). This process should be familiar to Japanese readers who wish to 
decipher a classical Chinese text. They would first read the kanji (“Chinese 
characters”) common between classical Chinese and modern Japanese. 
After that, they would infer the meaning of the textual gaps in order to 
make sense of those syntactical structures and paradigmatic choices that 
seem awkward to them. 


LINGUISTIC TERRAIN AND WORLD TIME 281 


Mediation is therefore understood as a process of kua yujing (“crossing 
linguistic terrains”), which corresponds to the meaning of the Chinese term 
meijie (“media”). The word can be traced back to the “Zhang Xingcheng 
zhuan” [Biography of Zhang Xingcheng] in the Jiu Tang shu [Old books of 
Tang, Liu Xu]. It means “through the intervention of a go-between” (Liu 
1975 [941-45]). The term puts the emphasis on the act of intervention, which 
produces a synergy that would otherwise be missing if the two parties were 
to act alone. The media therefore sutures discrete linguistic terrains by 
retranslating their shared values and reconstructing textual gaps when the 
process of translation fails. As a result, a third semantic field is produced. 

Furthermore, Malinowski considers the process of mediation a process of 
gift-exchange, which demarcates the social, cultural, and political bounda- 
ries between speakers. For Malinowski (1920, 99-100), vaygu’a (“valuables”) 
that carry no “surreptitious value other than a certain reconfirmation of a 
bond between members of a community who are of the same social status” 
are being transacted in this process of gift exchange. This also has the effect 
of distinguishing the inside and outside of a community by negotiating the 
boundary between those who can partake of the process of gift exchange 
and those who are excluded from it. These valuables are therefore traded 
not for their utilitarian values, but for the purpose of stimulating “a desire 
for wealth, for ownership”. For Malinowski (1920, 103-105), these valuables 
circulate in the trading ring as tokens for expressing communal needs, 
sexual desires, friendship, and social recognition. 

Malinowski’s study of the Kula ring inspired many critical responses, 
most notably from Marcel Mauss (2000 [1925]), Claude Lévi-Strauss (1987 
[1950]), and Jacques Derrida (1992 [1991]). Annette Weiner (1992), upon a 
closer study of the vaygu’a trade, argues that the trading of these valuables 
conveys a bundle of rights that are being transferred between traders. Made 
by women, they are part of a circulation of women as tokens of kinship and 
bonding between men. In this sense, negotiation between linguistic terrains 
is conducted for the purpose of maintaining a circulation of desire among 
members of the ruling class. In so doing, they establish a social hierarchy 
between those who hold the authority to trade and those who are reduced 
to a status of being traded (e.g. women). 

On the positive side, the term yujing communicates a hope that con- 
temporary media, through both verbal and nonverbal interventions, can 
circumvent the linguistic differences between geopolitically separated 
communities. On the negative side, it simply indicates that these differences 
need to be acknowledged—and, to some extent, maintained—in order to 
reaffirm our existing international order and hierarchy of power. In this 


282 WORLD BUILDING 


negative interpretation, mutual understanding can be understood as a 
social consensus that is achieved through the intervention of state or cor- 
porate power. For example, our social media (e.g. Facebook, Youtube, Tudou, 
and Weibo) do not open up a fully democratized process of mediation. 
Rather, they facilitate a process of gift exchange that would consolidate our 
existing sense of social spaces and in-group affiliations. They also maintain 
distances between media communities that are separated physically by 
their verbal languages, cultural values, and political conditions. In the end, 
they operate on a beliefin a presumably unbridgeable semantic gap between 
these media communities, that is supposed to instantiate the imagined 
incommensurability between China and the World. 


Conclusion 


Technology, therefore, has inspired generations of Chinese media research- 
ers to reimagine the world as a technical assemblage. In this technological 
mediate, human lives are configured as technical beings that could poten- 
tially trespass the geopolitical hierarchy constituted by Euro-American 
colonialism. Li Xiaofang’s idea of rebuilding the world in terms of temporal 
technicity offers a renewed understanding of the relationship between 
China and the World. Nonetheless, by rearticulating Li’s idea in ethnocentric 
and logocentric terms, Sun Mingjing implicitly maintains that ethnological 
and linguistic differences are fundamental to being human. As long as 
media are designed and operated in order to overcome such differences, 
human lives as technical bodies would never be considered ethnologically 
or linguistically equal. In fact, as China and the United States began to share 
technology, they were understood as having the rights to manage those 
communities who were left behind by this technological connection. Mean- 
while, by re-spatializing linguistic, cultural, social, and political formations 
as linguistic terrains, the yujing model reaffirms the colonial imagination 
of the world order. In this model, a trading ring carefully regulated by the 
ruling authorities—be that governmental or corporate—work together to 
construct a new linguistic topos, which has the effect of reconsolidating 
the existing hierarchy of political power with China as a new pole of world 
authority. Today, the PRC government is still negotiating the same set of 
conflicting beliefs, that China and the United States are considered to 
be on the same temporal plane, yet the imaginary incommensurability 
between China and the World requires state intervention to protect those 
linguistic terrains understood as specific to the Chinese nation. In other 


LINGUISTIC TERRAIN AND WORLD TIME 283 


words, the emergence and proliferation of new forms of media may bring 
hope that interregional inequity could be addressed. However, as long as 
media theory remains logocentric and ethnocentric, human beings are 
ultimately imagined as operators of media, whose ethnological and lin- 
guistic differences would never be reconfigured or removed. In this sense, 
human beings are not the operators of media; rather, they are slaves to the 
geopolitical technicity that operates them. 


Works Cited 


Agamben, Giorgio. 2004. The Open: Man and Animal, translated by Kevin Attell. 
Stanford: Stanford University Press. 

Bao, Weihong. 2015. Fiery Cinema: The Emergence of an Affective Medium in China, 
1915-1945. Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press. 

Barthes, Roland. 1994 [1974]. S/Z: An Essay (1970), translated by Richard Miller. 
New York: Hill and Wang. 

Benjamin, Walter. 2006 [1936]. “The Work of Art in the Age of Its Technological 
Reproducibility: Second Version,” In: Selected Writings, translated by Edmund 
Jephcott and Harry Zohn; edited by Marcus Bullock and Michael Jennings. 
Cambridge, Mass.: Belknap Press. 101-142. 

Brownell, Susan. 1995. Training the Body for China: Sports in the Moral Order of the 
People’s Republic. Chicago: University of Chicago Press. 

Chen, Gongbo (Ch’en Kung-po). 1967 [1928]. “Muqian zenyang jianshe guojia ziben” 
[How do we build up our national capital now?], In: Chen Gongbo xiansheng 
wenji [Anthology of essays written by Master Ch’en Kung-po]. Hong Kong: 
Yuandong tushu gongsi or Jyundung tousyu gungsi. 39-66. 

Chen, Hongwei. 2016. “Micro-Film in the China-Burma-India Theater: A Logistical 
Genealogy of the World Brain.” Conference Presentation. Society of Cinema and 
Media Studies. Atlanta, Georgia. 30 March. 

Derrida, Jacques. 1992 [1991]. Given Time. I, Counterfeit Money, translated by Peggy 
Kamuf. Chicago: Chicago University Press. 

Ding, Yaping; and Jiang, Wu (eds.). 2009. Kua wenhua yujing de Zhongguo dianying: 
dangdai dianying yishu huigu yu zhanwang [A Chinese cinema that crosses 
culturo-linguistic terrains: a retrospective and forethought of the art of con- 
temporary cinema]. Beijing: Zhongguo dianying chubanshe. 

Dirlik, Arif and Xudong, Zhang (eds.). 1997. Postmodernism and China. Durham, 
NC: Duke University Press. 

Du, Weitao. 1943. “Dianhua jiaoyu mantan” [On electrified education]. Dianying 
yu boyin [Film and Radio] 2:6, 1-4. 


284 WORLD BUILDING 


Duan, Tianyu. 1944. “Zhanhou de dianying jiaoyu’” [Post-war film education]. Film 
and Radio 3:7-8, 1. 

Fan, Victor. 2015. Cinema Approaching Reality: Locating Chinese Film Theory. Min- 
neapolis: University of Minnesota Press. 

Guan, Hengzhi. 1942. “Dianhua jiaoyu peihe guomin jiaoyu shishi ji” [Practical 
coordination between electrified education and national education]. Film & 
Radio 1:6, 20. 

Hansen, Miriam. 2004. “Room-for-Play: Benjamin’s Gamble with Cinema.” October, 
109 (Summer): 3-45. 

He, Chengzhou; Junya, Ma; and Xian, Zhou. 2008. Yujinghua zhong de renwen kexue 
huayu [The paradigm of the humanities under the concept of the linguistic 
terrain]. Beijing: Beijing daxue chubanshe. 

Heidegger, Martin. 1996 [1953]. Being and Time: A Translation of Sein und Zeit, 
translated by Joan Stambaugh. Albany: State University of New York Press. 
Hey, Jonathan. 2008. “Double Modernity, Para-modernity,” In: Antimonies of Art and 
Culture: Modernity, Postmodernity, Contemporaneity, edited by Nancy Condee, 
Okwui Enwezor, and Terry Smith. Durham, NC: Duke University Press. 113-132. 

Johnson, Matthew. “International and Wartime Origins of the Propaganda State: 
The Motion Picture in China: 1897-1955.” PhD thesis. University of San Diego. 
83-156. 

Kang, Youwei. 2005 [1910]. Datong shu [Book of great commonality]. Shanghai: 
Shanghai guji chubanshe. 

LaMarre, Thomas. 2010. “The Biopolitics of Companion Species: Wartime Anima- 
tion and Multi-Ethnic Nationalism,” In: The Politics of Culture: Around the Work 
of Naoki Sakai, edited by Richard F. Calichman and John Kamjun Kim. London: 
Routledge. 72-90. 

Lévi-Strauss, Claude. 1987 [1950]. Introduction to the Work of Marcel Mauss, trans- 
lated by Felicity Baker. London: Routledge and Kegan Paul. 

Li, Jianyuan. 2009. Houxiandai dianying: houxiandai xiaofeigiguan [Postmodern 
cinema: a cultural spectacle of the consumerist society]. Chengdu: Sichuan 
renmin chubanshe. 

Li, Xiaofang. 1943. “Shijian zhi ceding baocun yu guangbo: sanshier nian shi yue yi 
ri zai Jinling daxue dianjiao xuehui yanjiang” [The measurement, preservation, 
and broadcast of time: a talk given at the Electrified Education Association in 
the Nanking University on 1 October 1943]. Film and Radio 2:9, 5-9. 

“Lianhua dashi ji” [“U.P.S. Events” | (1935), In: Lianhua nianjian: Minguo 22-24 nian 
[U.P.S. Year Book: 1933-34]. Shanghai: United Photoplay Service. 12-18. 

Liang, Qichao. 2003 [1902-06]. “Lun shangwu’” [On militarism], In: Liang Qichao 
jingdian wencun [Collection of the classic essays by Liang Qichao], edited by 
Hong Zhigang. Shanghai: Shanghai Daxue chubanshe. 53-63. 


LINGUISTIC TERRAIN AND WORLD TIME 285 


Liu, Lydia. 2004. The Clash of Empire: The Invention of China in Modern World 
Making. Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press. 

Xu, Liu. 1975 [941-45]. Jiu Tang shu [Old Books of Tang]. Beijing: Zhonghua shuju. 

Malinowski, Bronistaw. 1920. “Kula; the Circulating Exchange of Valuables in the 
Archipelagoes of Eastern New Guinea.” Man, vol. 20, 97-105. 

Mauss, Marcel. 2000 [1925]. The Gift: The Form and Reason for Exchange in Archaic 
Societies. Trans. W. D. Halls. New York: W. W. Norton. 

Massumi, Brian; de Boever, Andre; Murray, Alex; and Roffe, Jon. 2009. “Technical 
Mentality’ Revisited: Brian Massumi on Gilbert Simondon.” Parrhesia, no. 7, 
36-45. 

Saussure, Ferdinand de. 2014 [1916]. Cours de linguistique générale. Paris: Payot. 

Saussy, Haun. 2007. “China and the Word: The Tale of a Topos.” Modern Language 
Quarterly 68, no. 2, 145-171. 

Silverman, Kaja. 1983. The Subject of Semiotics. New York: Oxford University Press. 

Simondon, Gilbert. 2015 [1958]. Du mode d’existence des objets techniques. Paris: 
Aubier. 

Sloterdijk, Peter. 2004. “Anthropo-Technology.” New Perspective Quarterly 21:4 
(Fall), 40-44. 

Stiegler, Bernard. 1998 [1994]. Technics and Time, 1: The Fault of Epimetheus, trans- 
lated by Richard Beardworth and George Collins. Stanford: Stanford University 
Press. 

Su, Shaohong; Xiaoqian, Wang; Xueli, Xiong; Yan, Yan; and Qingyi, Zhang. 2009. 
Peidu dianying zhuanshi yanjiu [A specialized historical study of Chungking 
Cinema]. Beijing: Zhongguo chuanmei daxue chubanshe. 

Sun, Mingjing. 1942. “Dianying yu dongyuan minzhong’” [Film and mobilization 
of the masses]. Film and Radio 1: 5, 2-9. 

—.1943a. “Women de mubiao” [Our target]. Film and Radio 2: 3, cover page. 

—.1943b. “Guangdianxue (Photo-electricity).” Film and Radio 2: 4, 15. 

—.1943C¢. “Dianhuajiaoyu yu zhanhou jianshe’” [Electrified education and post-war 
reconstruction]. Film and Radio 2: 6, 4-6. 

—.1943d. “Shidai shi qianjin de” [Time is always progressing]. Film & Radio 2:9, 
back cover. 

Schwartz, Benjamin. 1964. In Search of Wealth and Power. Yen Fu and the West. 
Cambridge, Mass.: The Belknap Press of Harvard University Press. 

Weiner, Annette. 1992. Inalienable Possessions: The Paradox of Keeping-While- 
Giving. Berkeley: University of California Press. 

Xu, Guoqi. 2008. Olympic Dreams: China and Sports, 1895-2008. Cambridge, Mass.: 
Harvard University Press. 

Yan, Fu. 1895. “Yuan qiang” [On the origin of strength]. Zhi bao. March 4.1. 


286 WORLD BUILDING 


Zanasi, Margherita. 2000. “Chen Gongbo and the Construction of a Modern Nation 
in 1930s China,” In: Nation Work: Asian Elites and National Identities, edited 
by Timothy Brook and Andr. Schmid. Ann Arbor: The University of Michigan 
Press. 125-158. 

Zhang, Xianwen, ed. 1990. Jinling daxue shi [History of the Nanking University]. 
Nanjing: Nanjing daxue chubanshe. 

Zhong, Baoxian (Chung Po-yin). Xianggang yingshi ye bainian |Hoenggong jingsijip 
baaknin or One hundred years of Hong Kong film and television industry]. Hong 
Kong: Joint Publishing. 


About the author 


Victor Fan is Senior Lecturer in Film Studies at King’s College London and 
Film Consultant of the Chinese Visual Festival. His articles appeared in 
journals including Camera Obscura, Journal of Chinese Cinemas, Screen, 
and Film History: An International Journal. His book Cinema Approaching 
Reality: Locating Chinese Film Theory was published in 2015 by the University 
of Minnesota Press. 


16. The Worlds Align 


Media Convergence and Complementary Storyworlds in 
Marvel’s Thor: The Dark World 


Dru Jeffries 


Boni, Marta (ed.), World Building. Transmedia, Fans, Industries. Amster- 
dam University Press, 2017 


DOI: 10.5117/9789089647566/CH16 


Abstract 

The Marvel Cinematic Universe is the most ambitious experiment in 
cinematic world building to date. The MCU is like other blockbuster 
adaptations in that it adapts preexisting narrative material, but it is also 
distinct insofar as it doesn’t adapt a finite story featuring a stable set 
of characters. What is being adapted from Marvel Comics is not stories 
but rather an approach to world building. The MCU embraces a logic 
of transfictionality, defined as an intertextual relation that “uses the 
source text’s setting and/or inhabitants as if they existed independently” 
(Saint-Gelais 2005, 612). The comics are positioned as complementary to 
yet diegetically separate from the films. Convergences between these 
complementary storyworlds reward fans’ knowledge and encourages 
multiple close viewings of the films. 


Keywords: Marvel; Media convergence; Storyworlds; Thor; Trans- 
fictionality. 


“Every 5000 years the worlds align perfectly, and we call this the Convergence. 
During this time, the borders between worlds become blurred.” 
— Thor, in Thor: The Dark World 


The Marvel Cinematic Universe (MCU), as represented in an ongoing series 
of live-action films produced by Marvel Studios beginning in 2008, is the 
most ambitious and influential experiment in cinematic world building 
to date. The MCU is similar to other blockbuster series, like The Lord of the 
Rings, The Hobbit, and Harry Potter, in that it adapts material that previously 


288 WORLD BUILDING 


existed in another medium (in this case, comic books are the primary 
source of inspiration, though Marvel characters had been transmedial for 
decades before their cinematic incarnations). All of these franchises also 
take advantage of media convergence in order to spread their brands across 
multiple platforms, thereby appealing to the broadest possible audience. 
But the MCU is also significantly distinct from these properties insofar as 
it doesn’t adapt a finite story revolving around a stable set of characters. 
Where the Harry Potter films adapted the story told in J.K Rowling’s novels, 
the MCU adapts the ongoing storyworld created over decades of Marvel 
Comics publishing. Specific narratives may be loosely adapted (e.g. Captain 
America: The Winter Soldier borrows its title and certain narrative elements 
from the comics storyline of the same name), but, in general, the stories 
told within the MCU are original. As the MCU progresses with each film, 
the stories differ more and more from their comic book inspirations in 
order to jibe with the world as established in previous films: for example, 
in Avengers: Age of Ultron Tony Stark and Bruce Banner invent the artificial 
intelligence Ultron instead of Hank Pym, partly because the latter had not 
yet been introduced in the MCU. 

What is really being adapted from comics, then, is ultimately not stories at 
all but rather an approach to world building and media franchising. One of 
the goals of this chapter is to explicate the precise nature of the relationship 
between the MCU and its comics counterpart and what makes it unique 
in cinematic culture.’ This relationship is not adequately explained by the 
traditional logics of adaptation or transmedia storytelling alone; rather, the 
Marvel Cinematic Universe primarily embraces a logic of transfictionality, 
which Richard Saint-Gelais has defined as an intertextual relation that 
“neither quotes nor acknowledges its sources. Instead, it uses the source text’s 
setting and/or inhabitants as if they existed independently” (2005, 612). The 
Marvel Comics Universe is thereby positioned as both complementary to and 
diegetically separate from the films. The resulting convergences between 
these complementary storyworlds, combined with the interactivity built 
into serialization as a narrative mode, rewards fans’ “insider” knowledge of 
the Marvel Comics Universe and encourages multiple and close viewings of 
the films themselves, particularly in their home video versions. 

Consideration of the entire MCU is beyond the scope of a single chapter. 
While The Avengers is arguably the key text of the MCU to date, serving as 
the convergence point for its four previously established character-centric 
franchises (Iron Man, The Incredible Hulk, Thor, and Captain America: The 
First Avenger), Thor: The Dark World is a more productive case study for 
unpacking the company’s position regarding media convergence. More so 


THE WORLDS ALIGN 289 


than any other installment in Marvel’s ongoing experiment in serialized 
filmmaking to date, The Dark World both enacts and embodies the key 
elements of the studio’s transfictional strategy. More than merely dem- 
onstrating processes related to media convergence, The Dark World turns 
said processes into narrative, demonstrating a high degree of industrial 
self-reflexivity. Before looking at that film specifically, however, it’s neces- 
sary to define the key concepts as they pertain to Marvel Studios. 


Marvel, Thor, and Transfictionality 


As defined by Saint-Gelais, transfictionality refers to instances in which 
“two (or more) texts [...] share elements such as characters, imaginary loca- 
tions, or fictional worlds” (2005, 612). Some additional clarification, however, 
is required to differentiate this from other manifestations of intertextuality, 
like adaptation. In sharp contrast to the model of transmedia storytelling 
proposed by Henry Jenkins, in which narrative pieces that are deliberately 
spread across different texts and media can be assembled to forma unified 
story (2006, 95-96), transfictional texts thwart attempts at intertextual 
coherence. When read in conjunction with one another, contradictions 
are evident: try as one might, the jigsaw pieces don’t fit together. What 
distinguishes transfictional relationships from adaptations or other kinds 
of intertextual links between texts is that their storyworlds must be 
both related and incompatible (Dena 2014, 487). Saint-Gelais introduces 
the example of Sherlock Holmes, whose popularity (and public domain 
copyright status) has resulted in a character that appears in multiple 
incompatible storyworlds related to each other only by his presence. Each 
iteration—regardless of author or medium—shares and participates in the 
broader transfictional entity that encompasses multiple iterations of the 
character without the narrative burden of being “canonical.” Saint-Gelais 
offers that “The solution here may be to consider transfictional versions as 
counterparts, i.e., as inhabitants of distinct possible worlds, bearing close 
relationship to their original, even though it might seem counter-intuitive 
to assign original and version to separate worlds” (2005, 612). 

Thor is a transfictional character, perhaps to an even greater extent than 
any other Marvel character. Prior to his transformation into a superhero, 
he had appeared in centuries’ worth of mythology stemming from vari- 
ous cultures. His debut in Marvel’s Journey into Mystery #83 (August 1962) 
constituted a pop-cultural appropriation of Norse mythology, modified to 
fit the conventions of the superhero genre: notable additions included a 


290 WORLD BUILDING 


“mild-mannered” alter-ego and the ability to fly. Otherwise, the comic book 
version of Thor bore many similarities to various mythological versions and 
increasingly so as the story progressed: the comics eventually eliminated 
Thor’s human secret identity and love interest in order to more closely 
resemble Norse mythology (Arnold 2011, 157). The version of Thor “created 
by” Stan Lee and Jack Kirby for Marvel Comics is heavily indebted to previ- 
ous mythological versions, but still sufficiently distinct as to constitute a 
transfictional counterpart. Norse mythology is thus related to these comics 
by virtue of Thor’s presence in both; but they are also incompatible because 
a reader can’t simply use mythology as the Marvel Thor's backstory, though 
they will inevitably find some overlapping elements. The appropriate stance 
to assume as a reader is to use the mythological Thor as a pool of potential 
knowledge that may or may not apply to Marvel's Thor: in other words, to 
treat them as complementary storyworlds.3 

This also describes the relationship between the MCU and its comics 
counterpart. Knowledge of comic book canon allows viewers to make hy- 
potheses about what might happen next in the film universe. While recent 
trends in adaptation studies suggest that the source material/adaptation 
dyad should be understood laterally rather than hierarchically (Hutcheon 
2006, 169), in this case, the primacy of the comics is a significant part of 
the MCU’s world-building strategy. Not only would the Cinematic Universe 
not exist without the prior existence of the Comics Universe, but the idea 
of the viewer’s (potential) prior knowledge of the latter seems to be a key 
component of how Marvel Studios films address their viewers. In particular, 
unexplained or background phenomena— often referred to as “Easter eggs” 
in this context—represent clues as to the future direction of the story. This is 
more complicated than foreshadowing, since the expectations set up in this 
way are both ambiguous and unreliable. For instance, the appearance of an 
unnamed purple alien in the middle of The Avengers’ credits sequence has 
almost no narrative value without recourse to the comics’ complementary 
storyworld, which tells us his name (Thanos) and goal (to destroy the uni- 
verse using the Infinity Gauntlet, which grants its wearer godlike powers). 
Viewers thus hypothesize that the MCU is building towards a version of 
story. Subsequent events in the MCU—Thanos’ failed attempt to possess 
an Infinity Stone in Guardians of the Galaxy, the announcement of the 
two-part The Avengers: Infinity War to be released in 2018 and 2019— provide 
additional support to this hypothesis. Another example is the MCU’s version 
of The Mandarin, an Iron Man villain first foreshadowed by the presence of 
an Afghani terrorist organization called the Ten Rings (a transformation of 
the comic book Mandarin’s ten power rings) in Jron Man. Iron Man 3 finally 


THE WORLDS ALIGN 291 


saw the introduction of this super-villain to the MCU as the viral video- 
producing leader of the Ten Rings. The marketing of the film, especially 
when combined with viewers’ extratextual knowledge of the comic book 
character, proved to be an elaborate misdirect: a plot twist at the end ofthe 
film’s second act reveals the cinematic Mandarin to be a washed-up actor 
working under the instruction of the film’s true villain. In both cases, the 
large body of Marvel Comics acts as a pool of potential knowledge about 
the MCU that viewers are expected to draw from in order to contextualize 
otherwise unexplainable narrative material or to anticipate future visits to 
the serialized storyworld. Serialization as a narrative mode also encourages 
repeated exposure to texts as viewers or readers await the next installment; 
the time between entries is filled up by acts of rewatching, hypothesizing, 
interpreting, and a “sense of interactive production between creator and 
reader” (Gardner 2012, 60). The transfictional relationship between Marvel’s 
complementary storyworlds provides much of the fodder for these activities 
as viewers acquire and exchange knowledge about comic book continuity 
and how it might manifest in the MCU. 

Though this essay focuses on Marvel Studios, transfictional world build- 
ing—that is, world building characterized by the creative transformation 
of and continued engagement with another preexisting storyworld—is 
a popular, if often unacknowledged, narrative strategy. Star Trek is an 
excellent example of a franchise reboot that uses the existing continuity 
established in the 1960s television series as a complementary storyworld, 
allowing savvy viewers to make informed guesses about the narrative 
direction while also being surprised by changes to canon. Television su- 
perhero series like Smallville and Gotham thrive on making references to 
the complementary story worlds of films and comics featuring DC Comics 
characters and delight in delaying or challenging the expectations that 
result from having knowledge thereof. 

Nevertheless, Marvel Studios remains unique for its unprecedented 
scope, spanning seven individual franchises (including The Avengers) across 
twelve films between 2008 and 2015, with an additional five franchises and 
ten films scheduled for release between 2016 and 2020. It is based on this 
impressive output that Matthias Stork claims that the MCU 


is primarily a cinematic creation, and not a transmedia construction. 
While the films were designed to cultivate the Marvel brand and open 
revenue streams in other (media) outlets, establishing an economically 
inflected trans-film structure, they did not create any explicit transmedia 
narratives (Stork 2014, 85). 


292 WORLD BUILDING 


This is not strictly true; while the cinematic texts are certainly distinct from 
the comic book canon, the MCU does embrace transmedia storytelling in 
combination with its transfictional world building. For instance, Marvel 
publishes comics that function as “preludes” to MCU films (e.g. Thor: The 
Dark World Prelude); they include short films on home-video releases that 
tell narratives peripheral to the features (e.g. Hail to the King, an Iron Man 
3 spin-off included on The Dark World's Blu-ray); they broadcast weekly 
television series that allow for weekly engagement with the MCU (e.g. Agents 
of SHIELD); and they produce additional serialized television series that are 
released to Netflix (e.g. Daredevil).* Marvel Studios thus mobilizes media 
convergence in complex ways, such that their storyworld cannot be fully 
understood using the frameworks of adaptation, transmedia storytelling, 
or even transfictional world building in isolation: indeed, theirs is the 
ultimate crossover. An analysis of Thor: The Dark World will demonstrate 
the degree to which Marvel is invested in convergence as a touchstone of 
their cinematic world-building strategy. 


What is the Convergence? 


In media studies, convergence is defined as “the flow of content across 
multiple media platforms, the cooperation between multiple media indus- 
tries, and the migratory behavior of media audiences who will go almost 
anywhere in search of the kinds of entertainment experiences they want” 
(Jenkins 2006, 2). In Thor: The Dark World, the same term—albeit with a 
capital “C”—is used to refer to the moment at which the nine realms align, 
enabling individuals to travel between worlds or, as the villainous Malekith 
plots, to destroy the entire universe in one fell swoop. The terminological 
overlap suggests that the film is thinking through some of the potential 
consequences of digital convergence, while also articulating Marvel Studios’ 
approach to world -building within this media environment. According 
to Nicholas Rombes, this kind of self-reflexivity is a recurring tendency of 
digital cinema. He writes, 


It is paradoxical how completely the tables have turned: for now it is 
film theory which has become domesticated, safe and predictable, 
while digital cinema makes possible new and potentially radical ways 
of storytelling, and introduces interface systems [e.g. DVD] that suggest 
a form of theory and critique (Rombes 2009, 13). 


THE WORLDS ALIGN 293 


More concretely, he describes how films like Scream and Bubble have con- 
tributed to the mainstreaming of film theory, with their self-deconstructing 
narratives and, more broadly speaking, the proliferation of behind-the- 
scenes footage that attends digital cinema (such as that found on DVDs). 
Thor: The Dark World engages in these same practices, doing for media 
convergence what Scream did for the genre conventions of the slasher film: 
turning media theory into narrative action. 

Since The Dark World is less obvious in its appropriation and narrativiza- 
tion of theory than Scream, the best way to proceed is to demonstrate how 
various aspects of media convergence manifest in the film one by one. A 
logical place to start is with the film’s convergence of science and magic, 
which is first made explicit in Thor: as the eponymous protagonist explains 
to scientist Jane Foster, “Your ancestors called it magic, but you call it science. 
I come from a land where they are one and the same.” As a world-building 
effort, this is necessary in order to expand the physical laws of the MCU as 
established in previous entries like Iron Man and The Incredible Hulk, both 
of which feature scientists that become superheroes through a combination 
of advanced technology and medical experimentation. Magic doesn’t seem 
to exist in that world, but the introduction of Thor necessitates a reconcep- 
tualization of the shared storyworld’s physical laws that are inclusive of 
magic, or, rather, that understand magic as an advanced form of science. 
In The Dark World, Jane plays an important role as the audience surrogate, 
travelling to the foreign world of Asgard and attempting to understand 
their magic in terms of her own scientific knowledge. A brief verbal dispute 
between her and an Asgardian healer about the designation given to a piece 
of technology—“Does a ‘soul forge’ transfer molecular energy from one place 
to another?” she asks— explicitly aligns the magical technology with its 
Earth equivalent, which Jane identifies as a quantum field generator. 

The convergence of science and magic has long been a cornerstone 
of the superhero genre—Richard Reynolds writes that “the depiction 
of science as magic is crucial to the way in which the superhero comic 
mythologizes certain aspects of the society it addresses” (1994, 16)—but it 
takes on additional significance in a cinematic context. The distinctions 
between a “scientific” documentary-style approach to filming the world 
and a “magical” approach to playing with and transforming the world 
through film were most sharply felt in the wake of cinema's emergence, the 
figureheads of each approach being cinematographe inventors the Lumière 
brothers and magician Georges Méliés, respectively. While film historians 
have devoted considerable efforts to nuancing this simplistic narrative, 
the science/magic binary has returned with a vengeance in the digital 


294 WORLD BUILDING 


era. As Laura Mulvey notes using language very relevant to the present 
discussion, “The convergence between the arts of reality and the arts of 
deception that brought about the birth of the cinema in 1895 prefigures the 
convergence between the cinema machine and digital technology” (2006, 
34). Digital superhero cinema is an amalgamation of the arts of reality and 
of deception: the science of the Lumières and the magic of Méliès becomes 
the technology of Iron Man and the magic of Thor, which are ultimately 
“one and the same” in digital cinema. 

This points directly to the MCU’s primary intervention in contemporary 
Hollywood: the convergence of discrete, character-based franchises into a 
unified “mega-franchise” first hinted at by Nick Fury after the credits of 
Tron Man (“You're part a larger universe, Mr. Stark...”) and later realized in 
The Avengers. Stork describes the MCU’s franchising strategy thusly: 


Per Marvel’s superhero movie logic, character properties in genre fare 
are to be featured synergistically, as part of a larger franchise experi- 
ment within Hollywood. [...] The Avengers is essentially the brand icon of 
Marvel's cinematic universe and, as such, the final stage of the company’s 
endeavor to reframe the aesthetic, economic, and industrial dynamics 
of the superhero genre. (2014, 78-79) 


As a post-Avengers installment in the MCU, Thor: The Dark World makes 
numerous references to the crossover event, reminding viewers that this is 
not only a sequel to Thor but to The Avengers as well. Narratively speaking, 
this occurs quite naturally, since the key characters are all affected by 
actions that took place in that film: for example, Dr. Selvig has gone insane 
after being mentally possessed by Loki; Loki is imprisoned on Asgard after 
his attempt to conquer Earth; Thor is uninterested in ruling Asgard because 
he feels a responsibility to Earth and the Avengers; Jane punches Loki “for 
New York’, a reference to The Avengers’ climatic “Battle of New York”; and 
Loki briefly shapeshifts into Captain America to irritate Thor. This is char- 
acteristic of Marvel Studios post-Avengers: similarly, Iron Man 3’s narrative 
is motivated primarily by the protagonist’s struggle with post-traumatic 
stress disorder after The Avengers. 

As stated earlier, the Convergence is also a key component of the film’s nar- 
rative in general: it provides the ticking clock against which all the characters 
must race, whether to execute the villainous plot or to prevent its success. 
During the Convergence, the nine realms—Asgard, Earth/Midgard, and 
seven others—come into alignment with each other, similary to an eclipse. 
When this occurs, various physical anomalies occur, including gravitational 


THE WORLDS ALIGN 295 


irregularities and the random appearance of portals between worlds. As Jane 
puts it, “The walls between worlds will be almost non-existent. [...] The very 
fabric of reality is going to be torn apart.” The Convergence isn’t something 
that anybody orchestrates or deliberately brings into being: it is merely 
something that happens, a natural occurrence whose effects can be taken 
advantage of for either good or ill. If we read the Convergence as a metaphor 
for media convergence, it might seem as though the film’s conceptualization 
of media falls into the trap of media theory and history identified by Lisa 
Gitelman in Always Already New: “Naturalizing, essentializing, or ceding 
agency to media is something that happens at a lexical level every time 
anyone says ‘the media’ in English, as if media were a unified natural entity, 
like the wind” (2006, 2). The Dark World’s Convergence can be understood in 
precisely these terms, but the Aether is the film’s analogue for media, insofar 
as it is what must be harnessed and deployed during the Convergence in 
order to produce the desired effects. Media and convergence aren’t the same 
thing: convergence is a state of affairs that has come into being because of 
overlapping technologies and particular audience practices, while what we 
choose to do with media within that environment is a matter of individual, 
collective, or corporate agency. 

If there is a commentary on convergence to be found in Thor: The Dark 
World, however, it surely lies in one particular consequence of the Con- 
vergence: the ability to travel between worlds. While travelling between 
media is properly the domain of transmedia storytelling, travelling between 
storyworlds is something that is done primarily by transfictional characters, 
of which Thor is a prime example. Thus, perhaps the film has something to 
say regarding Marvel Studios’ preferred strategy for executing such trans- 
fictional leaps. In the film, the Convergence doesn’t merely facilitate move- 
ment between worlds, but erases the walls that separate and distinguish 
them from one another. This Alignment of worlds is not a “good” or “bad” 
thing on its own—both Heimdall and Dr. Selvig call it “beautiful”—but this 
erasure of distinctions between worlds is represented as something that can 
have dire consequences. By extension, media convergence is portrayed as 
something with great potential—especially for viewers, which is the subject 
position from which Heimdall speaks of the Convergence’s beauty—but 
that also needs to be tightly controlled. 

Derek Johnson has argued that the successful transmedial marketing 
of comic book characters requires “the elimination of difference between 
the comic and audiovisual versions of its character properties” (2007, 67). 
For MCU films, however, this couldn’t be further from the case.5 Indeed, 
in order to remain comprehensible, transfictional characters like Thor 


296 WORLD BUILDING 


and the storyworlds they inhabit need to remain clearly distinct from 
other competing versions and worlds. The tendency toward transmedia 
narratives in convergence culture can make the boundaries between 
these multiple storyworlds unclear, but transfictionality depends upon 
the continued existence rather than erasure of those boundaries. Moreo- 
ver, the hypothesizing, close watching (and re-watching), and communal 
knowledge sharing discussed earlier as cornerstones of the MCU’s serialized 
narrative strategy are facilitated by these boundaries; without them, the 
MCU becomes another exercise in adaptation or transmedia storytelling, 
or risks requiring a chalkboard full of complicated diagrams, connections, 
and flow charts—such as that devised by Selvig in this film —in order to 
follow its narrative. 

Indeed, this chalkboard directly parodies what the MCU could become if 
its storyworld were to align with Marvel Comics. This is signalled explicitly 
by the appearance of the words “616-universe” on the chalkboard, which 
refers specifically to the primary story world (known as “Earth-616”) within 
which most Marvel Comics take place. While the chalkboard—like MCU 
films in general—is replete with “insider” references that fans seek out and 
assign meaning to, this reference stands out because it refers not to the 
diegetic content of Marvel Comics but rather to the storyworld of the comics 
as a whole.° For this reason, it doesn’t call on viewers to hypothesize about 
the future direction of the narrative but rather to reflect on the relationship 


16.1: Thor. The Dark World 


THE WORLDS ALIGN 297 


between these two distinct storyworlds. In this context, the implication 
seems clear enough: The Dark World equates the convergence of these two 
storyworlds with the destruction of the nine realms, which is precisely the 
fate that the transfictional hero fights to prevent. 


Easter Eggs, Home Viewing, and a Superhero Cinema of 
Complexity 


The “insider” references found on the aforementioned chalkboard are ex- 
amples of “Easter eggs”: small details hidden within a text for the purpose 
of being found by eagle-eyed viewers. Easter eggs are “usually associated 
with video games” (Nooney 2014, 165), though they can also be found on 
DVDs, leading to hidden bonus features “to which those less ambitious or 
less familiar with computer gaming will not be privy” (Klinger 2006, 79- 
80). There’s also precedent for discussing messages hidden within the text 
itself—like the scrawling on Selvig’s chalkboard—as Easter eggs. Referring 
specifically to this type, Ross Hockrow instructs filmmakers that “Easter 
eggs make your film more valuable. Call them gifts that keep on giving— 
and reward repeat viewers with them” (2013, 99). Digital filmmaking and 
home-viewing seems to have encouraged filmmakers to increasingly insert 
such messages into their films, resulting in what Graeme Harper has dubbed 
the “cinema of complexity”, a defining feature of which is the necessity of 
repeat viewings: 


Whereas to watch a film more than once was, in the past, mostly the 
domain of cult-film fandom, or was merely repetitive, DVD introduced 
the idea that traditional mono-directional, or sequential, cinema was 
just one component of the moving-image experience, and that repeat 
watching was not only acceptable but was almost required. Rather than 
a film having one life it might, in fact, have many. (Harper 2005, 97) 


Though sales of DVD and Blu-ray are on a seemingly irreversible downward 
trajectory since the wide-scale adoption of streaming services like Netflix, 
Marvel Studios’ use of home video continues to fit the model outlined by 
Harper in 2005. More specifically, The Dark World's Blu-ray encourages view- 
ers to conceive of the MCU as a discrete and unified story world, separate 
(though related) to that of the Marvel Comics. In short, the strategies that 
define Marvel's approach to filmmaking are also evident in their films’ 
post-theatrical afterlives. 


298 WORLD BUILDING 


Jonathan Gray writes that “paratexts are not simply add-ons, spinoffs, 
and also-rans: they create texts, they manage them, and they fill them 
with many of the meanings that we associate with them” (Gray 2010, 6). 
DVDs are an excellent case study for this phenomenon, insofar as they 
include the film itself but with the “added value” of additional material, 
including scenes deleted from the final cut, documentaries about how the 
film’s production, commentaries that allow filmmakers to address viewers 
directly, and so on. All of this material can contribute to the viewer’s 
understanding of a film; indeed, many have written about the power 
of DVD supplemental material to influence audiences’ understanding 
of films, emphasizing a desired interpretation while closing off others.’ 
How Marvel Studios’ films like Thor: The Dark World are packaged for 
home consumption can thus provide some insight on how the company 
wants their films to be understood. Gray claims that “DVDs fully illustrate 
how multimedia corporations can employ networks of paratextuality to 
brand their products and increase the salience and depth of their mean- 
ings across the synergistic spectrum” (2010, 102). In the case of Thor: The 
Dark World, the Blu-ray largely serves to reinforce the scope of the MCU, 
positioning the film itself as a single episode in a much larger story. 

When a viewer puts Thor: The Dark World into his/her Blu-ray player, 
she must first select her preferred language (for the menu options). Once 
this simple action has been completed, the animated Marvel Studios logo 
and fanfare plays automatically, contextualizing everything to follow as a 
product of Marvel Studios. After this, two advertisements play automati- 
cally: first is the theatrical trailer for Captain America: The Winter Soldier, 
which follows The Dark World in the MCU chronology; second is a promo 
for “Phase One” of Marvel Studios’ cinematic output, which begins with Iron 
Man and culminates in The Avengers. The latter ad emphasizes the positive 
critical reception of each film and the “unprecedented” risk of crossing 
over multiple franchises, establishing Marvel Studios as a purveyor of high 
quality and ambitious entertainment. Thus, before the viewer has even had 
the opportunity to press play, she has already been given a primer on The 
Dark World's place within a larger serialized narrative, an opportunity to 
reflect on the groundbreaking nature of Marvel’s world-building experi- 
ment, anda tease for its imminent next installment. These paratexts make 
it impossible for a viewer armed with this Blu-ray to approach the film as 
a self-contained narrative. 

The selection of bonus material offered on the disc further emphasizes 
the interconnectedness of the MCU. The primary bonus feature is a short 
film titled All Hail the King that functions as a sequel to Iron Man 3. The 


THE WORLDS ALIGN 299 


short elaborates on the events of that film, connecting the red herring 
“Mandarin” of Iron Man 3 to the Ten Rings initially mentioned in Jron 
Man and teasing the existence of a Mandarin that would more closely 
resemble the original comic book version. The short thus backtracks to 
some extent on Iron Man 3's refutation of the comics’ Mandarin in a way 
that encourages fans to anticipate a (potential) future appearance by 
the villain in the MCU. The disc also features an “exclusive look” at the 
then-upcoming Winter Soldier. Though these features relate more directly 
to Iron Man and Captain America than Thor, their presence on The Dark 
World home-video release functions to place the film in its chronological 
place after Iron Man 3 and before The Winter Soldier in the larger MCU 
narrative. 

Other features are more typical of a Hollywood blockbuster home-video 
release, including a short gag reel, deleted scenes, music featurette, a cast 
and crew audio commentary, and a 30-minute documentary about the 
relationship between Thor and his antagonist brother Loki. What’s surpris- 
ing about these, however, is the lack of attention given to the film’s comic 
book roots. Aside from a small handful of references to superficial visual 
similarities between certain characters and their comic book versions, the 
focus is entirely on the cinematic universe as a discrete entity. When the 
comic book references contained in the film are unpacked, a transfictional 
stance is proposed. In the audio commentary, for instance, producer Kevin 
Feige explains what Marvel hopes to achieve in the scenes they hide after 
the credits in each of their films: 


The best of the Marvel tags, for us, can do two things: it can tie up loose 
ends from the movie you've just watched, and it can set up something to 
come in the Marvel mythology [...] So people who know who Nick Fury 
is [in the comics] can get excited [at the end of Iron Man] but people 
who have no idea who he was but knew who Sam Jackson was would be 
curious and would want to know. In the same way we hope some people 
will know this is the Collector [in the post-credits tag in Thor: The Dark 
World], most people will simply know it’s Benicio Del Toro and do “What 
the heck is this, and where the heck is he?” and be curious enough to seek 
out those answers.® 


This search for knowledge first leads viewers to Marvel Comics; as de- 
scribed earlier, the gap between serialized releases forces curious viewers 
to hypothesize about future MCU releases based primarily on knowledge 
of its complementary story world. Only later, after Guardians of the Galaxy 


300 WORLD BUILDING 


is released, can viewers test those hypotheses against the film itself. Of 
course, that film will then provide more tantalizing hints about future 
possibilities in the MCU and the cycle of serialization repeats ad infinitum. 

Today’s convergences—between analog and digital technologies across 
the entire contemporary media landscape—inform not only the conditions 
of production, marketing, and distribution of superhero blockbusters but, 
at least in the case of Thor: The Dark World, but their narratives as well. 
Marvel Studios has achieved unprecedented commercial success by con- 
necting their franchises in a long-form serialized narrative that plays out 
within a single coherent storyworld. In this regard, Thor: The Dark World 
is merely emblematic of Marvel Studios’ output, another cog in its increas- 
ingly complex narrative machine; what makes it unique and valuable as a 
case study is its self-reflexivity regarding the role of media convergence in 
franchised storytelling. Though the conceptual frameworks of adaptation 
and transmedia storytelling continue to inform how audiences and critics 
overwhelmingly conceive of such works,’ transfictionality and the concept 
of complementary storyworlds are both more accurate and more useful 
in describing and understanding the relationships between the worlds of 
contemporary superhero films and their comic book counterparts and the 
ways in which audiences navigate them. 


Notes 


1 The influence of the MCU on other film studios, however, may render its 
uniqueness short-lived. Film blogs and trade publications regularly report 
on various studios’ attempts to transform their existing properties into 
“shared universes’, including Universal's bid for a “Monster-verse” (begin- 
ning with Dracula Untold). 

2. See: Roberta Pearson’s chapter in this volume, which fleshes out Saint- 
Gelais’ example of Sherlock Holmes. 

3. Inher contribution to this volume, Marie-Laure Ryan associates transfic- 
tionality with the expansion of a single storyworld through additional texts 
(e.g. adaptations, sequels, and the like). In my case study, however, the 
character rather than the storyworld acts as the central organizing principle 
connecting separate storyworlds through a transfictional relation. 

4. These Netflix series follow the model of franchise convergence previously 
established by the MCU: four individual series will introduce the characters 
separately, followed by a fifth series in which they team up, Avengers-style. 
These will also be released between 2015 and 2020. See: http://deadline. 
com/2013/11/disney-netflix-marvel-series-629696/ (accessed 29 January 
2015). 


THE WORLDS ALIGN 301 


5. For instance, as of this writing, the Thor of the Marvel Comics Universe is a 
woman, which is easily distinct from the MCU version and totally contrary 
to the process of homogenization across different media described by 
Johnson. See: http://marvel.com/news/comics/22875/marvel_proudly_pre- 
sents_thor (accessed 5 August 2015). 

6. The other key references here are to “The Fault” and “The Crossroads’, 
which hint at comics characters forthcoming to the MCU (namely Doctor 
Strange and the Inhumans). 

7.  Brookey and Westerfelhaus’s article about the Fight Club DVD’s seeming at- 
tempt to discourage queer readings of the film is emblematic of this trend. 
Transcription from the Blu-ray’s audio commentary. 

9. For instance, in the Afterword to the essay collection Superhero Synergies, 
Andreas Raucher writes that recent superhero movies like The Aveng- 
ers take part in “media convergence, creating synergies like transmedia 
storytelling and concepts of world building that result in the adaptation of 
comic book narratives into story and game worlds across a variety of media 
channels” (2014, 239). 


Works Cited 


Arnold, Martin. 2011. Thor: Myth to Marvel. London: Continuum. 

Brookey, Robert Alan; and Westerfelhaus, Robert. 2002. “Hiding Homoeroticism 
in Plain View: The Fight Club DVD as Digital Closet.” Critical Studies in Media 
Communication 19.1, 21-43. 

Dena, Christy. 2014. “Transmedial Fiction,” In: The Johns Hopkins Guide to Digital 
Media, edited by Marie-Laure Ryan, Lori Emerson, and Benjamin J. Robertson, 
486-487. Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press. 

Gardner, Jared. 2012. Projections: Comics and the History of Twenty-First-Century 
Storytelling. Stanford, CA: Stanford University Press. 

Gitelman, Lisa. 2006. Always Already New: Media, History and the Data of Culture. 
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press. 

Gray, Jonathan. 2010. Show Sold Separately: Promos, Spoilers, and Other Media 
Paratexts. New York: New York University Press. 

Harper, Graeme. 2005. “DVD and the New Cinema of Complexity,” In: New Punk 
Cinema, edited by Nicholas Rombes, 89-101. Edinburgh: Edinburgh University Press. 

Hockrow, Ross. 2013. Storytelling Techniques for Digital Filmmakers: Plot Structure, 
Camera Movement, Lens Selection, and More. Buffalo: Amherst Media. 

Hutcheon, Linda. 2006. A Theory of Adaptation. New York: Routledge. 

Jenkins, Henry. 2006. Convergence Culture: Where Old and New Media Collide. New 
York: New York University Press. 


302 WORLD BUILDING 


Johnson, Derek. 2007. “Will the Real Wolverine Please Stand Up? Marvel's Mutation 
from Monthlies to Movies,” In: Film and Comic Books, edited by Ian Gordon, 
Mark Jancovich, and Matthew P. McAllister, 64-85. Jackson: University Press 
of Mississippi. 

Klinger, Barbara. 2006. Beyond the Multiplex: Cinema, New Technologies, and the 
Home. Berkeley: University of California Press. 

Mulvey, Laura. 2006. Death 24x a Second: Stillness and the Moving Image. London: 
Reaktion Books. 

Nooney, Liane. 2014. “Easter Eggs,” In: The Johns Hopkins Guide to Digital Media, 
edited by Marie-Laure Ryan, Lori Emerson, and Benjamin J. Robertson, 165-166. 
Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press. 

Raucher, Andreas. 2014. “Afterword: When Story Worlds Collide: Superhero Movies 
and Transmedia Patchworks,” In: Superhero Synergies: Comic Book Characters 
Go Digital, edited by James N. Gilmore and Matthias Stork, 237-242. Lanham: 
Rowman & Littlefield. 

Reynolds, Richard. 1994. Super Heroes: A Modern Mythology. Jackson: University 
Press of Mississippi. 

Rombes, Nicholas. 2009. Cinema in the Digital Age. London: Wallflower Press. 

Saint-Gelais, Richard. 2005. “Transfictionality,” In: Routledge Encyclopedia of 
Narrative Theory, edited by David Herman, Manfred Jahn, and Marie-Laure 
Ryan, 612-613. London: Routledge. 

Stork, Matthias. 2014. “Assembling the Avengers: Reframing the Superhero Movie 
through Marvel’s Cinematic Universe,” In: Superhero Synergies: Comic Book 
Characters Go Digital, edited by James N. Gilmore and Matthias Stork, 77-96. 
Lanham: Rowman & Littlefield. 


Media Cited 


Agents of S.H.I.E.L.D. 2013-. New York: ABC, 2013. Television. 

The Avengers. Directed by Joss Whedon. 2012. Burbank, CA: Marvel Studios, 2012. 
Blu-ray. 

Avengers: Age of Ultron. Directed by Joss Whedon. 2015. Burbank, CA: Marvel 
Studios, 2015. Blu-ray. 

Bubble. Directed by Steven Soderbergh. 2005. Dallas: Magnolia, 2005. Blu-ray. 

Captain America: The First Avenger. Directed by Joe Johnston. 2011. Burbank, CA: 
Marvel Studios, 2011. Blu-ray. 

Captain America: The Winter Soldier. Directed by Joe and Anthony Russo. 2014. 
Burbank, CA: Marvel Studios, 2014. Blu-ray. 

Daredevil. 2015-. Los Gatos, CA: Netflix, 2015. Netflix. 


THE WORLDS ALIGN 303 


Dracula Untold. Directed by Gary Shore. 2014. Universal City: Universal Pictures. 
2015. Blu-ray. 

Gotham. 2014-. Los Angeles: 20 Century Fox Television, 2014. Television. 

The Incredible Hulk. Directed by Louis Leterrier. 2008. Burbank, CA: Marvel Studios, 
2008. Blu-ray. 

Iron Man. Directed by Jon Favreau. 2008. Burbank, CA: Marvel Studios, 2008. 
Blu-ray. 

Iron Man 3. Directed by Shane Blank. 2013. Burbank, CA: Marvel Studios, 2013. 
Blu-ray. 

Scream. Directed by Wes Craven. 1996. New York City: eOne Films Distribution, 
2011. Blu-ray. 

Smallville. 2001-2011. Burbank, CA: The CW, 2001. Television. 

Star Trek. Directed by J.J. Abrams. 2009. Hollywood: Paramount Pictures Home 
Entertainment, 2010. Blu-ray. 

Thor. Directed by Kenneth Branagh. 2011. Burbank, CA: Marvel Studios, 2011. 
Blu-ray. 

Thor: The Dark World. Directed by Alan Taylor. 2013. Burbank, CA: Marvel Studios, 
2013. Blu-ray. 


About the author 


Dru Jeffries is a Postdoctoral Fellow at the University of Toronto’s Cinema 
Studies Institute. He received his PhD in Film and Moving Image Studies 
from Concordia University. His first book, Comic Book Film Style: Cinema 
at 24 Panels Per Second, is forthcoming from University of Texas Press and 
he has published work on comic book films in Making the Marvel Universe 
(forthcoming from University of Texas Press), Porn Studies, Quarterly Review 
of Film and Video, and Cinephile. 


17. 


World Building and Metafiction in 
Contemporary Comic Books 


Metalepsis and Figurative Process of Graphic Fiction 


Denis Mellier 


Boni, Marta (ed.), World Building. Transmedia, Fans, Industries. Amster- 
dam University Press, 2017 


DOI: 10.5117/9789089647566/CH17 


Abstract 

Since Alan Moore’s The Watchmen (1987), the process of world building 
within fictional worlds seems to be openly represented in a large number 
of comics. Developed in highly complex games of inclusion and metalepsis 
(Genette, 2004) and far from being a repellent detachment set-up, this 
exposure of narrativity and fictionality represents a strong appeal for 
readers. Highly reflexive and metafictional comics have developed 
today into a wide practice of “metacomics” (Baurin, 2012) that shapes 
the stories, the graphic identity of characters or specific worlds, and the 
reading itself. It’s not only postmodern patterns that are at stake (irony, 
self-consciousness, fictional ontology, awareness among the superhe- 
roes, quotations, or hyper-referentiality), but the use of comics’ visual 
discourses to build a graphic motionless way of world building. It will be 
necessary to examine this topic not only within the scope of comics, but 
in the relationship that comics have with other media (literary fictions, 
films and video games) within a culture of convergence (Jenkins, 2008), 
or of “maillage intermédial” (Gaudreault, 2008). 


Keywords: Metafiction, Metalepsis, Reflexivity, The Unwritten, Deadpool, 
City of Glass 


In his recent book Cinéma, machine a mondes, Alain Boillat develops a 


world-building approach to cinema stressing, especially in science-fiction, 


post-apocalyptic fictions or metacinema, the importance of worlds and 


world-building. The particular attraction and pleasure of this type of 


WORLD BUILDING AND METAFICTION IN CONTEMPORARY COMIC BOOKS 305 


films would be based upon the representations themselves of these plu- 
ral worlds. The visual actualization and the conflicts in interpretation 
between those worlds would form the basis of their fiction rather than 
strictly narrative dynamics, plotting and characters (Boillat 2014). This last 
formula should be used cautiously, because it does not mean that there are 
no narrative, dramatic events nor action in movies like The Matrix, Dark 
City, Pleasantville, or Truman Show. There occurs a change in proportion 
in which worlds cease to be considered as the background for narrative 
actions and transformations. The mundane paradigm implies that this 
cinematic dimension of plotting and actions is drawn out of the presentation 
of worlds (at least two worlds: what Boillat calls “bimundane’), probing the 
ontological differences between them and, obviously, in the predominant 
dystopical and dysphorical structures of their narratives, dramatizing the 
mere conflict or antagonism between them. Commenting upon the two 
versions of Total Recall (Verhoeven 1990; Wiseman 2012), Boillat writes that 
the two movies “proceed from a similar procedure that makes the question 
of mundane organization the very object that the hero is seeking for” (Boillat 
2014, 236). Conflicts or spectacular shifts of worlds can be presented as 
contextual non-problematical data — like the formal rule of a game or a 
constraint in poetics and fictionality — or, they can lead to a manner of 
inevitable reflexive process questioning the composition of worlds within 
fiction but also questioning the very image of the media itself considered 
as a building process. 

The process of world building within fictional worlds has been widely 
thematized in comic books, since Alan Moore and Dave Gibbons’ Watchmen 
(1987), a famously reflexive piece of work. It is not only a matter of quality, 
singularity, and originality of the world invented and presented within one 
fiction: comics offer a vast wide range of properties, strange compositions 
of contexts, or stunning effects depending on the alternative realities that 
fictional worlds can expose, depending either on the imagination of the 
writer or on the graphic forms given by the artist. Comics often deal with the 
plurality of worlds through which characters, and particularly superheroes, 
are drawn to travel. They often narrate difficult, painful, or violent situations 
superheroes experience when they are launched in alternative and threaten- 
ing spaces and worlds. Ina diametrically opposed movement, they tell stories 
of invasions from outer or parallel worlds into a conventionalized fictional 
reality. But the word “world” covers a rather large variety of meanings, from 
determined technical uses (philosophy, mathematics, or physics) to sheer 
metaphorical acceptations. That term incorporates several different ques- 
tions that contribute to the shaping of the imaginary contents of fictional 


306 WORLD BUILDING 


thematizations. Let us then quickly examine three examples of those uses 
in comic books: the shift of formulaic elements that produces a significant 
revisionist version of a famous character; a whole alternative universe ora 
clear reboot of the entire world of characters; and a sophisticated narrative 
thematization of the very idea of world making itself. 

What if Superman had not landed in America but in the Soviet Union to 
become the superhero of the People’s Revolution? Would it, consequently, 
turn Lex Luthor into an American icon? Such uchronian revisionism of 
cultural imagination by means of its main hero constitutes the storyline 
of Superman: Red Son (Millar, Johnson, Plunkett, 2003). The graphic novel's 
political allegory of the antagonism of worlds is here expressed through an 
ideological inversion of an iconic myth: graphic coherence and consistency 
of worlds (communist Russia and dystopian America) are attributed to the 
two antagonistic blocks that the comic depicts. By shifting imaginary values 
from one world to another, Red Son does not only deal with the ironic use 
of the most iconic American superhero of all, but the skillful overturn of its 
uchronian perspective aims at having the reader question the fictional set of 
values he holds and the forms of representations its own visual culture carries. 

More radical in its approach than reboots or crossovers, the process 
in comic collections like DC’s Alternate or Marvel’s Ultimate, consists of 
creating elaborate alternate versions of worlds and to move well-established 
and favorite characters into completely new fictional surroundings. As is 
the case in Mike Mignola’s retro-futuristic steampunk Batman by Gaslight 
(1989), superheroes are then sent back in time, sometimes even without 
a causal explanation of any particular plot twist, like time machines for 
example, to rationalize their move in space, time, or dimension. They can 
simply be placed in some generic set of constraints, imaginary topics, or 
fictional conventions thus presented as “worlds”: in the Marvel Zombies 
comic book series, the home-grown superheroes, from Spider-Man to 
the Silver Surfer, Hulk or Iron Man, are turned into zombies after they 
have landed in what is described in the paratext as “a parallel earth”. Now 
superheroes are badly in need of food after they have eaten the whole world’s 
population in less than three hours (Kirkman & Philips 2006). Strongly 
distinct from or similar to their regular world, the second and parallel 
version therefore stands for the metaphor of fiction itself, and its figures will 
not only play on singularities or similitudes between the old original world 
and the new surprising one according to a more or less radical plot regime. 
The very means by which one accesses that world stands for an explicit and 
meaningful self-representation of fiction: gates, hazes, blurred surfaces, 
halos, slits, mazes, clouds, holes, pits, or any other graphic expression of 


WORLD BUILDING AND METAFICTION IN CONTEMPORARY COMIC BOOKS 307 


crossings, limits, and porosity. With its strong Lovecraftian intertextuality, 
the comic book series Locke & Key (Hill & Rodriguez, 2008) offers brilliant 
typological variations on such figures. 

Another example of such an extension of thematized world building in 
contemporary comics can be found in Black Science (Remender, Scalera, & 
White, 2014), whose narrative concept rests upon constant and uncontrolled 
shifts, experienced by the characters, inside a potential infinity of worlds. 
In several layers of the Infiniverse — another exploitation of the fictional 
potential of the multiverse or pluriverse — the discontinuity of environ- 
ments created by the science fiction storyline then emphasizes a dramatic 
continuity of the main character’s story. The main character is tortured by 
a personal drama in guilt, grief, and responsibility that carries on through 
the multiple layers of worlds, like in a self-reflexive science-fiction road 
movie running ina plurality of fictional worlds. 

A vast display of nuanced and pertinent examples of worlds and spe- 
cific thematizations of world building can be easily found in mainstream 
or independent comic book corpora, both being deeply nourished by genres 
that profusely supply imaginary worlds, like science fiction, superheroes, 
horror, or fantasy. But, as singular or autonomous as they may appear in 
their narratives, all those different thematizations open onto another level of 
representational and discursive effects. Representing two worlds within one 
fiction consequently leads to a reflexive surface on which the production of 
fiction itself and its relationship to reference are clearly symbolized and thus 
questioned. Such fictions inevitably draw attention to themselves by showing 
world building as a fictional and narrative process. It develops itself in highly 
complex games of inclusion and of crossing of borders between different 
types of worlds. Far from a repelling device, this exposure of narrativity 
and fictionality henceforth represents a strong appeal for readers. Highly 
reflexive and metafictional comics have today developed into a wider genre 
of metacomics that shapes the stories, the graphic identity of characters or 
specific worlds, and the act of reading itself. Not only are postmodern patterns 
at stake (irony, self-consciousness, fictional ontological awareness among the 
superheroes, quotations, or hyper-referentiality), but the use of comics’ visual 
discourses to develop a motionless graphic expression of world building. 

About books, films, or comics, and even in the context of ludic and non- 
exclusively-narrative fiction such as in video games, it is common to name 
and to consider the contexts in which the actions of characters or gamers’ 
avatars take place as “worlds”. The time and space — but also topography, 
architecture, climate, history, the list of inhabitants according to various 
degrees of coherence, consistence or completeness, and, in some cases, 


308 WORLD BUILDING 


even languages — compose what theory and poetics call diegesis. But when 
watching movies like The Matrix, The Truman Show, or TRON, or when 
reading comics like Wormwood, The Authority, Fables, Academy Umbrella, 
or The League of Extraordinary Gentlemen, readers quite pragmatically call 
the diegetical content of fiction a world. We particularly need to name it 
so when the fictional world represents in itself the co-existence of several 
different worlds. But the term “world” is not only used on that semantic level 
of utterances; it can also account for unusual communications between 
levels of contents that are distinct in our current experience. 

The term “world” allows us to describe formal distinctions about the 
semiotics of the media, about the narrative process, and the conception of 
fiction as they are developed in the graphic and sequential composition of 
the comics. The diegetic properties of any particular world that were briefly 
listed above may seem both peculiar and specific: all the characteristics that 
help to shape fictional worlds belong to a highly reflexive and metageneric 
(Jameson 2007) pop culture. It is made of ironical pastiche, convergence of 
images, films, fictions. Pop culture can be keen on complex constructions 
and relies on erudite quotations taken from a rhizomatic culture, borrowing 
as much to fandom as to academic references. Whether they belong to 
the superhero genre or not, insofar as the scenarios of many comics in 
contemporary pop culture represent several worlds within the frame of their 
fiction, readers have become increasingly familiar with a type of narrative 
that thematizes mundanity (Boillat 2014), that is to say, the question of 
worlds in fiction (and not necessarily of fictions as worlds). 

Since Watchmen, the reflexive tendencies in comics seem to have widely 
spread beyond the boundaries of authors and publishers of independent 
comics. Metacomics (Baurin 2012) are no exception in the current produc- 
tion of the comicdom. Therefore, comics do not only openly discuss their 
forms and contents, but they tend to assume that they henceforth deal with 
an explicit yet abstract and complex game. Such a reflexive game should 
not be taken as an axiological exception calling for higher forms of comic 
books; it consists, on the contrary, of a common basis of cultural motives 
largely appreciated by contemporary audiences. That mundane game in 
reflexivity is made of crossings of borders, presents alternative and parallel 
spaces and times and offers self-engendering layers of metadiegesis. That 
game develops itself on all the fictional potential of plurality of universes, 
exploiting the vertigos of the specular effects of inclusions, derived from 
Leibnitz’s monadology all the way to the pop recycling of contemporary 
physics. In that respect, the theory of the pluriverse is way easier to un- 
derstand in Marvel and DC or in science fiction than in mathematical 


WORLD BUILDING AND METAFICTION IN CONTEMPORARY COMIC BOOKS 309 


formalizations. If one may find the string theory a little abstract, thanks 
to the final scene of Interstellar, we can now picture it quite clearly as a 
pluriverse accessible behind a bookshelf in the hero’s daughter’s bedroom. 
But when it is fictionality itself that self-consciously becomes the very topic 
of fiction, something different, such as the metaphorical use of the term 
“world” to indicate estrangement in space, time, or dimension is at stake: it is 
henceforth an ontological difference that is represented and an ontological 
frontier that is openly crossed. 

Because fictions can thus be described as a succession of worlds built 
with their specificities, from a minimal mimetic gap to strongly autonomous 
and anti-mimetic universes, therefore, in a reflexive mode, fictional worlds 
can openly show the process of fiction and represent various auctorial con- 
ceptions and pragmatic relationships to fictions. When we are confronted 
with the representation of relationships within a fictional world that are 
antagonistic, or at least problematic, between one world considered as 
fictional and another that includes the former, then this type of narrative 
belongs to metafiction. In literature, cinema, or comics, each time the 
accessibility of these two worlds is a critical issue for the characters, and 
the crossing of such a border a possibility in his relationship to the worlds, 
then we are experiencing fiction through a metafictional perspective. 

The term “metafiction” derives from the field of literary criticism and it 
describes at least two aspects of self-representations of fictional properties 
within novels. The first focuses on the question of fictionality itself, of its 
boundaries or frontiers between different topographies of fictional worlds 
or artefacts; for example, and to put it in Genette’s terms, “the world from 
which the story is told, and the world that is told in the story” (1972, 245). 
We need look no further than Borges’s Fictions to find clear examples of 
metafictional constructions and figures, possibilities, or scenarios. A second 
aspect implied by metafictional texts derives from this Borgesian origin: 
because of its expansion in contemporary fiction, metafiction stands for 
a body of historically determined works. From the 1970s to the generaliza- 
tion of its discourses in pop culture today — to put it bluntly, from John 
Barth to Stephen King’s The Dark Half and Fellini’s Otto e Mezzo to Wes 
Craven's metahorror films — metafiction may appear as a protean genre. 
Consequently, metafiction is characterized by a certain set of generic forms, 
processes, and figures, as well as certain privileged types of narratives or 
plots (such as historiographic metafiction, travelogues, epistolary novels, 
anti-detective stories, or postmodern Gothic works). Such a description 
has been widely developed in the postmodern literary theory of the novel, 
using notions such as self-consciousness or reflexivity, irony and parody, 


310 WORLD BUILDING 


generalized intertextuality, and metagenericity (see: Waugh 1984, Hutcheon 
1988, McHale 1987, and Jameson 2007). 

When describing fictional games in ontological confusion and the blur- 
ring of borders between categories, Genette refers to a famous passage 
by Borges in Enquêtes, in which the latter plays as far as possible with the 
paradoxical reflexivity of representation and its object, between the map 
and the territory, the reader and the character (1972, 176). As fascinating 
as Borges’s formula can appear, and even if Genette quotes him here in a 
pleasant manner, it refers to a fictional predicament by its very nature. We 
may rather prefer to listen to René Girard’s reminder: “worrying about the 
fact that reality and fiction may be muddled amounts to still being in fiction, 
to disregard that everything here IS fiction” (Girard 1976, 6). 

Whatever its critical characterizations are, metafiction is still thought 
to stumble on logical and ontological frames rather than on a paradox: 
whether above or outside fiction, metafiction is still a fiction. It remains 
nothing more than a fiction, a fiction doubled, a duplicated figure of fiction 
revealing to the reader at least two worlds that are not supposed to come 
into contact or collide without the fictional erasure of the ontological frames 
that define their difference in status. Where else than in fiction could this 
blurring of frontiers be represented with their ontological consequences? 
Metafiction consists in turning such a possibility into a plot and in shaping 
series of worlds and their relationships according to it. 

The Unwritten (Carey & Gross, 2009) does not only belong to metafictional 
texts because this comic develops a complex metaliterary game between 
several interwoven levels of narratives and fictions: in the context of the 
graphic novel, the game remains the same old reflexive discourse known 
as mise en abyme from paintings to theatre, from novels to movies. The 
metafictionality in The Unwritten derives from the fact that the frontier 
between an extrafictional world and an intra- (or meta-)fictional one is 
graphically materialized as a limit—a formal figure that is crossed. Thus, 
metafiction comes with the fact that the porosity of this limit helps shape 
the secondary world as essentially different from the first while remaining 
accessible: for instance, World War II Germany is represented in gray while 
the characters of the extradiegetic level are in color. Finally, the ontological 
and mundane differences need to find their own formal way to be expressed 
by the media: an image from the first level literally passing through another 
image of the second one, when the colored characters pass through the 
German soldier or the inn’s wall. 

This example shows that the heterogeneity of space on which the 
metaliterary discourse of The Unwritten relies is not expressed through 


WORLD BUILDING AND METAFICTION IN CONTEMPORARY COMIC BOOKS 311 


an iconic heterogeneity of various media textures or forms, as it is the 
case in movies like Mary Poppins and Who Framed Roger Rabbit? Gross’s 
drawings do not seek an expressive difference between levels of fiction 
and thus present, within the same frame, the agents of continuity (similar 
techniques in drawing) and the metafictional effect of discontinuity and 
heterogeneity. The colors and drawn figures of crossing both play the part 
of symbolizing the game on ontology and forms within the story. What 
forms can graphic discourse give to fiction, to its limit and to its porosity? 
Such semantics of colors is a specific visual means and can be used, for 
example, as an iconic operator of transmedia, partaking in the maillage 
intermédial (Gaudreault 2008) typical of contemporary fictional culture. 
Such a transmedial process makes comics a heterogenous cultural text 
pervaded by contents of other fictions, such as the transfictional dimension 
of intertextuality in steampunk fiction. 

A highly reflexive comics like Deadpool abounds in transmedial and 
metafictional motives: after too planturous a meal, (Night of the Living Dead, 
Bunn & Rosanas, 2014) Deadpool wakes from a long nap to find himself 
in a gray zombiefied world that is a graphic version of George Romero’s 
engendering of original fiction. From Max Brooks’s survival techniques 
(The Zombie Survival Guide, 2003) to the patterns of 28 Days Later (Boyle, 
2002), 30 Days of Night (Templesmith & Niles, 2003) or The Walking Dead 
(Kirkman, Moore & Adlard, 2003), the common topics of zombie fiction are 
reenacted in Deadpool’s adventure. The convergence between cinematic 
and graphic fictions is determined here by an iconic and reflexive use 
of colors similar to a movie like Pleasantville. Even if the values of colors 
are simple to decipher, the use of fiction and the transmedial mode of 
metafiction they imply nonetheless rely on a certain abstraction in the way 
the reader can use that world. 

It is not the technical quality of the drawing that is discussed here nor 
the virtuosity with which an artist has the ability to produce the highest 
degree of mimetic performance in the production of a world, no more than 
the strongly asserted idiosyncrasy ofa particular graphic style. In that sense, 
stylization combined with an increasing figural autonomy, gained over 
a dominant narrative process, constitutes the very possibility of graphic 
metafictional discourses. 

In stories in which metafiction problematizes inclusion and border 
crossings between fiction and the character’s reality, formal simplicity or 
semantic explicitness works strongly interwoven with rather abstract no- 
tions that question the media and its fictionality. Their compatibility shows 
that, once more, the old cornerstone of axiomatics that long shaped the 


312 WORLD BUILDING 


reception of high and low cultures by opposing distanciation and emotional 
participation needs to be ceaselessly discussed questioned reconsidered. 
That is, not only in general and cultural terms but on a textual level, and 
particularly though analysis of the coherence and the homothety of forms 
and meaning in the comics themselves. That need for a close reading of 
process and figures avoids reducing the singularity of graphic style and 
visual answers to fictional literary or verbal metadiscourses. Consequently, 
it leads us to wonder what could be a specific graphic metafiction that would 
not be simple transposition, adaptation, or even transécriture (Gaudreault 
and Groensteen 1998) derived from another media form. Visual explicitness 
and abstraction make up the ground for figural emancipation and formal 
world autonomy. That opposition between explicitness and abstraction 
seems to work in quite a similar way as the one between critical distance 
— passed down from a now remote Brechtian heritage— and pathetic 
participation — today, in a more sophisticated fictional phrasing, what is 
called “immersion” (Schaeffer 1999, 179). Both dimensions are supposed to 
be contradictory when they are actually pairing together in contemporary 
pragmatic reception of intermedia pop culture. 

Let us consider a critically renowned metafictional work, like Paul Aus- 
ter’s City of Glass (1985), the first part of his New York Trilogy. In chapter 10, a 
character named Paul Auster asks Daniel Quinn, a former writer embedded 
under a false identity in a detective story that he fails to cope with, just 
before they part and in order to keep in touch: “Are you in the book?” This 
metaleptic pun sends the poor character back in the original world that he 
had left during that metafictional parenthesis. During that chapter, both 
the fictional writer (Quinn) and the metafictional one (Paul Auster, the Paul 
Auster within the book authored by Paul Auster—the one, according to the 
author's own terms, that “is and isn’t Paul Auster”) have discussed literature, 
reading and writing, and Don Quixote (the mother of all metafictions, way 
before Borges and Nabokov). The writer has shown off in front of Daniel, 
the amateur detective, his wonderful wife (Siri) and son (another Daniel): so 
many ways to openly represent the crossing of fictional boundaries. Figures 
offer representations of its metadiscourse to fiction: here the figure is a 
play on words, a figure of speech in ambiguity. In film, such constructions, 
surprises, and slips in narrative or discursive levels can be enacted just on 
with simple shot/reverse shot editing, for example. But what is the formal 
process through which comics or graphic novels can express the porousness 
of frontiers, the doubling of worlds within a world? 

We need to take aside the various and common figures related to reflex- 
ive strategies or mises en abyme: the comic-within-the-comic, the artist’s 


WORLD BUILDING AND METAFICTION IN CONTEMPORARY COMIC BOOKS 313 


hands drawing landscapes and characters, jumping over the frames or 
the voice of the screenwriter commenting upon his creation through his 
characters’ ironic lines. What would be a graphic way to express the ironic 
question that the metacharacter (Auster) asks the Quinn — the character 
trapped within the boundaries of fiction and the opacity of his detective’s 
investigation — before sending him back to his own segregated ontological 
level? How can the comic’s language and structure figure this process of 
inclusion in its own formal ways? 

In Karasik and Mazzucchelli’s graphic adaptation of Auster’s novel 
(2005), the pun is apparently lost or cast away, yet keeping it would have 
sounded perfectly suitable in the dialogue to keep it as a direct quotation 
from the novel, or even through some sort of symbolization of the fictional 
nature of Quinn confronted by his metafictional producer in writing. Hav- 
ing to choose between too literate a process and one that is too figurative, 
the graphic expression would lose the transécriture dynamics that allows 
the shift from one semiotic system to another. Here, the metafictional 
meeting of Auster and Quinn calls for a specific form addressing its figure 
to the graphic dimension of the media, and not only to the general category 
of fiction shared both by Auster’s novel and its adaptation as a comic. A 
figurative network spreads over several pages (78-89) exploring a proper 
graphic question about the engendering of writing and of fiction: the 
opening frame of page 88 is a hand holding a pen in a writing position on 
a white and empty background, the word “yes” appearing in a phylactery. 
The appearance of Auster opening the door of his flat, in the next frame, 
allows us to understand that the former is a close-up of Auster’s hand 
and pen, but seen from Quinn’s point of view. In a symmetrical effect, 
the last frame on the next right page again shows Auster’s hand, holding 
the same pen, but this time with his palm facing up. Set on a horizontal 
line of frames, the two panels proceed from a more visually associative 
effect rather than a syntactically coordinated one. “I’m a writer’, says 
the phylactery. The penultimate panel on the last strip of page 89 forms a 
diagonal line with the panel with Auster’s palm facing up, and it displays 
a typewriter on a similarly empty white background. The caption says: 
“Quinn told him the whole story”, written in the recognizable characters 
of a typewriter. Over the next ten pages, several panels regularly use blank 
white backgrounds, not necessarily because of close-ups or subjective 
focalizations. They work as stylized intensifications of the content over 
the context, they play the figure over the narrative, finding their own 
expressive way over the abundant verbal metadiscourse assumed by Auster 
in his Don Quixote’s lecture. 


314 WORLD BUILDING 


We cannot find any strict equivalent of the pun that would explicitly 
show the metafictional irony played on Quinn: the question “Are in you in 
the book?” provides a colloquial contraction of “phonebook”. But, as soon 
as Quinn has left Auster, he starts running down a very precisely drawn 
Brooklyn street until the angle moves to a view from below in the fourth 
panel, thereby erasing the setting to leave the frame blank and white again. 
The next panel presents the following caption: “He has been sent back so 
far before the beginning that it was worse than any end he could imagine.” 
Quinn runs across a larger panel, only a rather thick and short black line 
under his feet indicating the ground. Here, we find again this visual process 
of reduction to blankness in order to express reflexive motives: although 
the drawings may seem simple and bare, Karasik and Mazzucchelli’s work 
is extremely precise in the framing, in the play on the depicted settings and 
the abstracted ones, in the size and position of the panels in the strip, and 
in the use of single and double pages. 

This example shows how the metafictional communication between 
worlds and ontological levels succeeds in finding a graphic form that 
expresses both the questions raised in Auster’s novel about books, fiction, 
authorship and readership, and their shift in specificity towards another 
media. 

Metafiction is therefore not so much fiction squared as it is a representa- 
tion of a fiction included within another fiction: in comics, going from one 
level to another is symbolized by visual and formal boundaries that char- 
acters have to cross. Surprise, scandal, breakthrough, incongruity, whatever 
metaphor one could pick to comment upon the meaning and the effect of 
that crossing, such an ontological transgression of limits rests upon a figure 
known in poetry, literature, and cinema, as metalepsis (Genette 1972 and 
2004, Pier and Schaeffer 2005, Kukkonen and Klimek 2011). We do know for 
sure that comics are powerful metaleptic machines (Ryan 2004), challenging 
the boundaries between worlds in uncanny, frightening, or comic effects, 
and Genette more specifically evokes one of discordance or incongruity. But, 
when a figure is so widely spread in intermedial cultural texts, its effects 
and meanings end up being contrived, its disturbing potential is likely to 
have lost its edge and henceforth only consists of new formulaic patterns 
and neo-stereotypes in popular fictions (Mellier 2001). As rejoicing as the 
radical project of Deadpool kills the Marvel Universe may sound and as 
exciting as its prominent transfictionality and its whirlpool of references 
may appear, one might not find the metaleptic device of the last page up to 
the game. The comic book closes on a digest of reflexive conventions, from 
self-commentaries on their own enunciative engendering by the authors to 


WORLD BUILDING AND METAFICTION IN CONTEMPORARY COMIC BOOKS 315 


Deadpool’s direct address to the reader, half as an aside, half as what seems 
like a pose for the camera. 

Again, metalepsis is a figurative mechanism based on simple and abstract 
impulses, two aspects that are not necessarily antagonistic or contradictory. 
Metalepsis is a spectacular and highly noticeable figure, whether the fiction 
wants to stress the violence of the crossing or the momentary confusion 
between worlds, but it is a claim for an anti-mimetic and more autono- 
mous fictional construction of worlds. In this respect, by playing on the 
boundaries between worlds, metalepsis uses the Chinese box of its specular 
inclusions as well as the narrative possibilities to go back and forth between 
them, in a spectacularly attractive but sophisticated way. Metalepsis is 
often used in cinema theory as a way to challenge Hollywood’s realistic 
conventions, its genre categories, and the process of fictional immersion 
on which the power of its attraction is supposedly based. It appears that, in 
contemporary comics, metalepsis is so abundantly present as a trope as well 
as a plotting tool that it cannot any longer be considered as an infraction or 
a breaking of a given pact or generic convention in fiction or in narrative. 

Do metacomics (Baurin 2012) imply a specific type of reading experi- 
ence and a particular type of reader? Or have metacomics become the 
norm in contemporary transmedial and transfictional culture? If the 
postmodern reader is an ironic deconstructionist and a sampler, what, 
then, would the contemporary comics reader find as a consequence of his 
hyper- and transmedial consumption in his ability to straightforwardly play 
with highly autoreferential worlds? How does this reader use them when 
comics expose their fictionality and consequently redefine the standards 
of fictional belief and mimesis according various versions of worlds? As 
autonomous or autotelic a fictional world may be, it implies a formal, ifnot 
ontological, distinction at least with its outside ( i.e. the world that is outside 
itself, the world from which this fictional world is read, seen, and enjoyed). 
The relationships between our actual world and any fictional world, as 
soon as they are thematized into a graphic form, materialize fiction as an 
inclusion. In that sense, graphic fiction always tends to work as a diagram or 
a figure of fictional and narrative relationships, shaping limits, offering its 
readers the objectification of boundaries. The superhero ethos relies upon 
a paradigmatic expression of conflicts, just as the mundane oppositions 
described by Boillat concerning his own cinematic corpus are based upon a 
dystopian paradigm: broadened to the status of a contemporary imaginary 
of metalepsis, the figure still persists in its depiction of dualities in comics, 
ceaselessly inventing possibilities to renew the formal, graphic, aesthetic, 
visual language of the media. 


316 WORLD BUILDING 
Works Cited 


Auster, Paul. 2004. City of Glass (1985), In: The New York Trilogy. London: Faber & Faber. 

Baurin, Camille. 2012. Le metacomic. La réflexivité dans le comic book de super-héros 
contemporain, Doctoral dissertation, Université of Poitiers. http://neuviemeart. 
citebd.org/IMG/pdf/These.pdf 

Boillat, Alain. 2014. Cinéma, machine a mondes, Geneva: Georg Editeur. 

Borges, Jorge Luis. Fictions. 2010. Œuvres completes. Paris: Gallimard. 

Borges, Jorge Luis. 1975. Enquétes. Paris: Gallimard. 

Gaudreault, André. 2008. Cinéma et attraction. Pour une nouvelle histoire du 
cinématographe. Paris: CNRS éditions. 

Gaudreault, André; and Groensteen, Thierry (dir.). 1998. La Transécriture, pour 
une théorie de l'adaptation. Québec / Angoulême: Editions Nota bene / Centre 
national de la bande dessinée et de l'image. 

Genette, Gérard.1972. Figure II. Paris: Seuil. 

—.2004. Metalepse. Paris: Seuil. 

Girard, René. 1976. Critique dans un Souterrain. Paris: Grasset. 

Hutcheon, Linda. 1988. A Poetics of Postmodernism: History, Theory, Fiction. London 
& New York: Routledge. 

Jameson, Fredric. 2007. The signature of the Visible. London & New York: Routledge, 
New Edition. 

McHale, Brian. 1987. Postmodernist Fiction. London & New York: Routledge. 

Mellier, Denis. 2001. Textes Fantômes. Fantastique et auto-référence. Paris: Kimé. 

Pier, John and Schaeffer, Jean-Marie (dir.). 2005. Métalepses. Entorses au pacte de 
la représentation. Paris: Editions de ! EHESS. 

Kukkonen, Karin and Klimek, Sonja (dir.). 2011. Metalepsis in Popular Culture. 
Berlin and New York: Walter de Gruyter. 

Ryan, Marie-Laure. 2004. “Metaleptic machines,” Semiotica 150-1/4, 439-469. 

Schaeffer, Jean-Marie. 1999. Pourquoi la fiction ? Paris: Seuil. 

Waugh, Patricia. 1984. Metafiction, The Theory and Practice of Self- Conscious Fiction. 
London & New York: Routledge. 


Media Cited 


Cullen Bunn & Dilbor Talajic, Deadpool kills the marvel universe, Marvel, 2012. 

Cullen Bunn & Rosanas, Deadpool, Night of the Living Dead, Marvel, 2014. 

Mike Carey & Peter Gross, The Unwritten, n°1-5, DC Comics, 2009. 

Joe Hill & Gabriel Rodriguez, Locke & Key, Vol. 1: Welcome to Lovecraft, IDW Publish- 
ing; Reprint edition (August 20, 2009). 


WORLD BUILDING AND METAFICTION IN CONTEMPORARY COMIC BOOKS 317 


Paul Karasik & David Mazzucchelli, adaptation of Paul Auster’s City of Glass, 2004, 
Faber & Faber. 

Kirkman & Philips, Marvel Zombies, Marvel, 2006. 

Mark Millar, Dave Jonhson & Kilian Plunket, Superman, Red Son, DC Comics, 2003. 

Rick Reminder, Matteo Scalera & Dean White, Black Science, ‘How to Fall Forever’ 
(1-6), Image comics, 2104. 


About the author 


Denis Mellier is professor at the University of Poitiers, where he teaches 
comparative and general literature and film studies. He also teaches 
aesthetics in the Master Bandes dessinées at the EES] (Ecole Européenne 
Supérieure de l’ Image) of Angoulême. He has published several books on the 
theory of the fantastic and on movie thrillers, including L’Ecriture de l'excès: 
Poétique de la terreur et fiction fantastique, Paris, Honoré Champion, 1999. 
His main area of research is the theory of literature, cinema, media studies, 
and comics with a focus on questions about reflexivity in genre literature 
and cinema as well as the relations between these topics and literature in 
general. He was the editor of the French academic journal Otrante arts et 
literature fantastiques, published by Kimé for nearly 20 years. Denis Mellier 
is currently completing work on an essay on fantastic cinema and editing 
an issue of Recherches sémiotiques/Semiotic Inquiry on reflexivity in comics 
and graphic novels. 


Section 5 


Appropriations and Fan Practices 


18. 


The Monster at the End of This Book 


Metalepsis, Fandom, and World Making in Contemporary 
TV Series 


Valentina Re 


Boni, Marta (ed.), World Building. Transmedia, Fans, Industries. Amster- 
dam University Press, 2017 


DOI: 10.5117/9789089647566/CH18 


Abstract 

This chapter aims to analyze world-making practices in transmedia 
narratives and how viewers are engaged in these practices through the 
discussion of two narrative strategies, namely trompe-l’ceil and meta- 
lepsis, as they are used in the TV show Supernatural (The WB/The CW 
2005-present) and in the works produced by its fan base. My paper will 
be structured into three parts: first, I will provide a definition of the 
above mentioned strategies, including their main effects; second, I will 
discuss how the relationships between the use of these strategies, the 
participatory or networked culture of fandom and world-making practices 
can be interpreted and analyzed; and finally, I will focus on the case of 
the TV series Supernatural. 


Keywords: Metalepsis; Worldmaking; Fandom; Supernatural 


Introduction: the activity of world-making 


“Every TV series creates a world”, write Aldo Grasso and Massimo Scaglioni 


in their Introduction to the book Arredo di serie. “Of course, this is a quality 


that great literature, theater, and cinema share. However, in TV shows this 


ability to build worlds is, so to speak, amplified” (Grasso and Scaglioni 2009, 


7)." In addition to being related to serial and long-term storytelling devices 


that enable the development of increasingly complex and detailed narrative 
worlds, this amplification of TV series’ world-building activity appears as 
one of the main features of the contemporary media landscape and can be 


explained on the basis of various interconnected factors. 


322 WORLD BUILDING 


First, this amplification can be related to the possibility of developing nar- 
rative arcs and expanding narrative universes across multiple different media 
platforms (from novels, graphic novels, or comics to video games, from hoax 
websites to Alternate Reality Games and Role Playing Games), a possibility 
extensively discussed by Henry Jenkins (2006) through the well-known con- 
cept of transmedia storytelling. Second, the amplification of the world-building 
activity can be related to the notion of narrative complexity that Jason Mittell 
discusses as the new paradigm of television storytelling and that, of course, 
“was enabled by, and helped transform, the industrial, technological, and 
reception contexts of television in the 1990s and 2000s” (Mittell 2015, 30): 


Videogames, blogs, online role-playing sites, Twitter, fan websites and 
other digital technologies enable viewers to extend their participation in 
these rich storyworlds beyond the one-way flow of traditional television 
viewing, extending the universes of complex narrative creations such as 
Buffy’s Sunnydale or The Simpsons’ Springfield into fully interactive and 
participatory realms. (Mittell 2015, 35) 


Finally, the extended narrative environments of contemporary media 
production have been described through the idea of the narrative ecosystem: 
“According to this perspective, TV serial narratives are [...] open systems, 
comparable to natural environments, resilient in both time and space, 
combining and integrating narratives, characters and users, in a particular 
media space” (Pescatore, Innocenti and Brembilla 2014, 1-2). 

Before being used to characterize contemporary vast audiovisual narra- 
tives, this idea of an amplified diegesis, or storyworld, was frequently used 
to define the formal aspects of cult texts. In his book Fan Cultures, Matt Hills 
included the concept of hyperdiegesis into the “family resemblances’ of cult 
texts, together with auteurism and endlessly deferred narrative. According 
to Hills, a hyperdiegesis can be defined as 


The creation of a vast and detailed narrative space, only a fraction of 
which is ever directly seen or encountered within the text, but which 
nevertheless appears to operate according to principles of internal logic 
and extension [...]. The hyperdiegetic world may, as Jenkins (1992) notes, 
reward re-reading due to its richness and depth, but its role is, I would 
suggest, also one of stimulating creative speculation and providing a 
trusted environment for affective play. Particular genres or modes may 
be best suited to the maintenance of endlessly deferred narrative and 
hyperdiegesis. The predominance of science fiction, horror, fantasy, 


THE MONSTER AT THE END OF THIS BOOK 323 


comedy and camp texts within cult forms is far from accidental. (Hills 


2002, 104)* 


More recently, Matt Hills has returned to his original concept in order to 
consider how it can be related to transmedia narratives and, most of all, 
to extend the textual and spatial perspectives and define hyperdiegesis 
as a “reading strategy” that develops diachronically and by which fans 
participate in the creation of a narrative world and interact with canon 
and official production. 

Without directly mentioning hyperdiegesis, Umberto Eco already 
stressed the importance of rich and detailed narrative worlds with re- 
spect to cult texts in the 1980s. In his popular essay on the cult status of 
Casablanca,‘ Eco underlines that, to be transformed into a cult object, 
a work “must provide a completely furnished world so that its fans can 
quote characters and episodes as if they were aspects of the fan’s private 
sectarian world, a world about which one can make up quizzed and play 
trivia games so that the adepts of the sect recognize each other a shared 
expertise” (Eco 1986, 198).5 

Today, Eco’s reflections about how narrative components are used in 
everyday life can be extended beyond the realm of quizzes and trivia games. 
As Thomas Elsaesser underlines in relation to what he labeled “mind-game 
films”, taking the depicted world as realhas become one of the main “rules of 
the game” that organize multiple forms of relationship between the viewer 
and the film, or narrative world: “No more ‘representation’, no insistence on 
‘cultural constructions’: the discussions take for granted the ability to live in 
fictional or rather virtual worlds” (Elsaesser 2009, 30). Fan sites and forums 
“either ignore the fictional contract and treat the film as an extension of 
real life, to which factual information is relevant, or they tend to use the 
film as the start of a database, to which all sorts of other data—trivia, fine 
detail, esoteric knowledge—can be added, collected, and shared” (Elsaesser 
2009, 35). 

The multiple ways in which fans incorporate narrative worlds into their 
everyday worlds can be interpreted as world-making practices. We could 
say that the narrative world is taken as real in the sense that it is relevant 
to everyday life and plays a key role in the construction of identities, values, 
relationships, tastes, and visions, or “versions”, of the world. The last concept 
goes beyond a simplistic opposition between the real world and the fictional 
ones. In the framework of Nelson Goodman’s constructivism, which must 
be kept clearly separated from possible-worlds theory in literary studies, 
“we are not speaking in terms of multiple possible alternatives to a single 


324 WORLD BUILDING 


actual world but of multiple actual worlds” (Goodman 1978, 2). According to 
Goodman, the need to talk about multiple actual worlds depends upon the 
fact that “we are confined to ways of describing whatever is described. Our 
universe, so to speak, consists of these ways rather than a world or of worlds” 
(Goodman 1978, 3). Of course, these “ways of describing” are numerous 
and highly varied, and they include versions and visions produced in the 
sciences, in novels and paintings, as well as in our perceptions as shaped by 
situations, interests, and past experiences: “worlds are made by making such 
versions with words, numerals, pictures, sounds or other symbols of any 
kind in any medium” (Goodman 1978, 94). What is particularly interesting 
for the purposes of my analysis is the importance that Goodman gives to 
the role of fiction in world-making activities: 


The arts must be taken no less seriously than the sciences as modes of 
discovery, creation and enlargement of knowledge in the broad sense of 
advancement of the understanding, and thus that the philosophy of art 
should be conceived as an integral part of metaphysics and epistemology. 
[...] Works of fiction in literature and their counterparts in other arts 
[...] play a prominent role in worldmaking: our worlds are no more a 
heritage from scientists, biographers, and historians than from novelists, 
playwrights and painters. (Goodman 1978, 102-103) 


In this chapter, I will analyze world-making practices in transmedia narra- 
tives and how viewers are engaged in these practices through the discussion 
of two narrative strategies, namely trompe-lceil and metalepsis, as they are 
used in the TV show Supernatural’ and in the works produced by its fan 
base. My chapter is divided into three parts: first, I will provide a definition 
of the above mentioned strategies, including their main effects; second, 
I will discuss how the relationships between the use of these strategies, 
the participatory or networked culture of fandom (Jenkins 2006; Jenkins, 
Ford and Green 2013) and world-making practices can be interpreted and 
analyzed; and finally, I will focus on the TV series Supernatural. 


1. Metalepsis and trompe-l’ceil 


According to Mittell, complex storytelling or, more specifically, complex 
TV tends to transform “many viewers into amateur narratologists”. While 
they are not unique to complex TV, storytelling devices such as alterations 
in chronology, multiple points of view, ambiguous voice-over, or breaks of 


THE MONSTER AT THE END OF THIS BOOK 325 


the fourth wall are used in complex narratives with uncommon frequency 
and regularity, and are signaled with subtlety and delay, so the “viewer's 
engagement” is “focused on both diegetic pleasure and formal awareness” 
(Mittell 2015, 53). 

Although Mittell does not explicitly mention them, among the storytell- 
ing devices used within complex narratives we can also find metalepsis 
and trompe-lceil, which were originally defined in one of the pivotal texts 
about narratology, Gérard Genette’s Narrative Discourse. Based on Genette’s 
explanation of the phenomenon, Werner Wolf defines metalepsis as “a 
usually intentional paradoxical transgression of, or confusion between, 
(onto-)logically distinct (sub)worlds and/or levels” (Wolf 2005, 91). Such 
transgressions can take place from the metadiegetic to the diegetic levels— 
as in The Purple Rose of Cairo,’ in which a character moves from the movie 
to Cecilia’s “real” world—or the other way round—as in Pleasantville,’ 
in which teenagers David and Jennifer move from their “real” world to 
the fictional world of David's favorite sitcom (the TV show and the movie 
sharing the same title). 

Starting from this general definition, more specific forms of metalepsis 
have been discussed.’ For the purposes of my analysis, I will only mention 
the distinction between ontological and rhetorical metalepsis and the 
case of intertextual metalepsis. As Karin Kukkonen sums up, “ontological 
metalepsis occurs when a character, author or narrator are relocated across 
the boundary of the fictional world [or narrative level]’ (Kukkonen 20u,, 2),”” 
as in the case of The Purple Rose of Cairo; “rhetorical metalepsis, when they 
only glance or address each other across this boundary” (Kukkonen 2011, 
2), as in the beginning of Stranger than Fiction," when the main character 
is able to hear the voice of the narrator of his own story. 

Furthermore, “a different kind of boundary has been identified in studies 
of metalepsis: that between different fictional worlds. [...] Fictional worlds 
have boundaries which distinguish them from the real world and from each 
other” (Kukkonen 2011, 6) and, of course, these boundaries—as well as the 
boundaries between different parallel universes or alternate realities within 
a single narrative—can be broken or confused. It must be noted that this 
kind of transgression, which has been defined as “intertextual metalepsis” 
(Wagner 2002) and can be found, for instance, in fictional crossovers, does 
not belong to the original definition of metalepsis provided by Genette. In 
fact, according to Genette, metalepsis can occur only between hierarchical 
levels, and not across parallel levels, such as alternate realities, or different 
storyworlds. In other words, metalepsis in Genette’s theory is a “vertical” 
rather than “horizontal” phenomenon. 


326 WORLD BUILDING 


Metalepsis can produce two main, interrelated effects.” On the one hand, 
the transgression of narrative levels or fictional worlds may compromise the 
suspension of disbelief and break (or unveil) the fictional pact, generating 
a sense of oddity and of playful complicity; on the other hand, when the 
narrative levels are confused and the reality depicted within a narrative 
collapses, characters, as well as readers or viewers, are forced to question 
the distinction between fiction and reality and, more significantly, to 
interrogate the status of the worlds they inhabit, with a profound sense of 
ontological vertigo. As Genette points out: 


All these games, by the intensity of their effects, demonstrate the impor- 
tance of the boundary they tax their ingenuity to overstep, in defiance 
of verisimilitude—a boundary that is precisely the narrating (or the 
performance) itself: a shifting but sacred frontier between two worlds, 
the world in which one tells, the world of which one tells. Whence the 
uneasiness Borges so well put his finger on: “Such inversions suggest that 
if the characters in a story can be readers or spectators, than we, their 
readers or spectators, can be fictitious.” The most troubling thing about 
metalepsis indeed lies in this unacceptable and insistent hypothesis, that 
the extradiegetic is perhaps always diegetic and that the narrator and 
his narratees—you and I—perhaps belong to some narrative. (Genette 
1980, 236) 


This sense of ontological vertigo can also be related to another narrative 
strategy, defined by Brian McHale as trompe-lcil. “Postmodernist texts”, 
writes McHale, 


tend to encourage trompe-l'oeil, deliberately misleading the reader into 
regarding an embedded, secondary world as the primary, diegetic world. 
Typically, such deliberate “mystification” is followed by “demystification’, 
in which the true ontological status of the supposed “reality” is revealed 
and the entire ontological structure of the text consequently laid bare. 
(McHale 1987, 115-116)" 


Unlike the case of metalepsis, after an initial act of “mystification’, trompe- 
l'œil tends to reinforce the reality status of the diegetic level, which becomes 
“more true” due to the comparison to a fictitious, metadiegetic level. Never- 
theless, when two or more cases of trompe-lceil are combined, the resulting 
effect is very close to that produced by metalepsis: the distinction between 
fiction and reality tends to become confused and increasingly problematic. 


THE MONSTER AT THE END OF THIS BOOK 327 
2. Metalepsis, trompe-ľœil, and fan culture 


In the contemporary context of convergence, I would like to suggest that 
transmedia storytelling and participatory culture, metalepsis, and trompe- 
(ceil may produce a third, fundamental effect. More precisely, they can 
create an impression of real presence of the fictional worlds represented 
within a narrative. In doing so, they encourage and foster transmedia expan- 
sions based on the contamination between reality and fiction (for instance, 
Alternate Reality Games) on the one hand; on the other hand, they interact 
with fandom based on the implicit rule that “the world depicted is taken as 
real”. Ifa character presented as fictional can access the “real” world (as in 
The Purple Rose of Cairo) or if “real” characters can enter a fictional world 
(as in Pleasantville), why can’t we, the readers or spectators, pretend to 
access a fictional world, or allow the characters to enter our “real” world? 

This further effect is not only additional to the others, but also in 
contrast with the first, insofar as it seems to imply that metalepsis does 
not break or unveil the fictional pact so much as it consolidates it. From 
the reader’s point of view, the fictional pact could be formulated as fol- 
lows: I know this is not true, but I pretend to believe that it is. Rhetorical 
metalepsis tends to interfere with the second part of the sentence: How can 
I, the reader, pretend to believe that this is true if you, the narrator, keep on 
addressing me and reminding me that you are telling a story? Ontological 
metalepsis tends to interfere with the first part of the sentence: Am J, the 
reader, really sure that this is not real...? And can I be sure that the world I 
inhabit is the real one? 

My hypothesis is that, for both ontological and rhetorical metalepsis, this 
new effect is produced outside the fictional pact. In other words, the fictional 
world becomes true as soon as I take it for real and use it in my everyday 
life (ie. in my everyday activity of “making worlds by making versions”) 
and everyday social interactions with other fans. Thus, the third effect of 
metalepsis (creating an impression of real presence of the fictional worlds 
depicted within a narrative) is in tune with the properties that, starting from 
Eco’s observations about Casablanca, are generally attributed to cult texts. 

The idea of explicitly connecting metalepsis to fan culture is not new and 
has already been discussed in Tisha Turk’s essay on the use of metaleptic 
strategies in fan works, especially in fan fiction and fan videos within 
the wider context of participatory culture. “Most media fans”, writes Turk, 
“would not use or recognize the term ‘metalepsis’, but they are familiar 
with the concept of crossing diegetic or textual boundaries. [...] Participa- 
tory culture is inherently, if metaphorically, metaleptic; the transgressive 


328 WORLD BUILDING 


impulse that it represents is being effectively mainstreamed” (Turk 2011, 
96 -100). Turk’s analysis focuses on a vid titled J Put You There: through an 
explicit violation of the boundary between “reality” and fiction, the video 
ironically stages the culmination of the dream about an impossible love 
between a fan girl (whose world—“reality’—is represented in animation) 
and Giles, a character from the TV series Buffy.” Let us now try to extend 
the scope of Tisha Turk’s reflections and discuss possible interactions 
between metalepsis in contemporary popular narratives such as TV series 
(and specifically in Supernatural) and metalepsis in fan works. 


3: The case of Supernatural 


Supernatural tells the story of two brothers, Sam and Dean Winchester, who 
have devoted their lives to hunt demons, monsters, and other supernatural 
creatures. The series was first broadcast in 2005 on The Warner Bros Televi- 
sion Network and, since 2006, on its successor The CW Television Network. 
Season 12 premiered on 13 October 2016. 

Supernatural is a particularly interesting case study for many reasons. 
The first is that the show has an impressive and very active fan base, 
despite the fact that the network did not invest many resources in its 
promotion. The specificity of Supernatural becomes particularly evident 
if we compare it to other popular TV series such as Lost. As Laura Fels- 
chow points out: “The cult fans of Lost were offered overt invitations 
to participate with the text via an official message board, interactive 
podcasts, hidden Easter eggs, alternate reality games, mobisodes, and 
other extras.” On the contrary, “Supernatural fans |...| were offered the text 
of the series’ episodes and little else. [...] The fans of Supernatural came 
to the show without a strong invitation to participate. The program grew 
into a cult hit on its own steam” (Felschow 2010). Many factors, of course, 
contributed to the development of Supernatural fandom: the multiple 
genre frames activated (especially horror, fantasy, family melodrama, 
the road movie, comedy, and the Bildungsroman); the topics and values 
raised by the narrative (friendship, family, loyalty, altruism, religion); the 
intertextual references that enrich the series with quotations and hom- 
ages; the increasingly sophisticated interaction between the running plot 
and the anthology plot (according to Mittell, one of the distinctive features 
of complex TV), resulting in a progressive development of the psychology 
of the main characters, Sam and Dean Winchester. As show-runner Eric 
Kripke points out: 


THE MONSTER AT THE END OF THIS BOOK 329 


What we set out in the beginning to obtain is a really self-contained 
universe in which fans can come and go, and the rules and progressions 
are consistent. So just as in all other good universes, you can find new ways 
to expand and explore other corners of that universe [...] and the fact that 
the fans are actually doing that is a good sign. I love it and I welcome it. I 


wanted to create a universe where we welcome others to come and play.” 


Another reason why Supernatural is an outstanding case study is because 
it has “drawn attention to its fandom, and its fic, within the show itself” 
(Tosenberger 2010). In fact, as Catherine Tosenberger points out, “in seasons 
4and 5, riding a wave of increased ratings and visibility, Supernatural started 
depicting, within the diegesis of the show, the activities ofits fandom.” On the 
one hand, this textual (and diegetic) embodiment of the fandom is related to 
a wider metatextual and self-reflexive inclination of the TV series, which has 


20 


made a distinctive feature of such “meta episodes” (including quotations, 
references to the reality of production included in the diegesis,” or more gen- 
eral procedures that unveil the narrative construction of the fictional world). 

On the other hand, such an embodiment coincides with the use of 
metaleptic strategies that, while entailing a self-reflexive dimension, can be 
distinguished from other metatextual strategies. This overt address to fans, 
together with forms of metalepsis, appears in the episode titled “The Monster 
at the End of This Book.”’ The title itself stands as a sign of metalepsis. Before 
being an episode of Supernatural, The Monster at the End of This Book was 
the name of a children’s picture book based on the TV series Sesame Street 
starring the popular character Grover (Stone 1971). The book is entirely 
constructed on rhetorical metalepsis and takes the form of a transgression 
between the diegetic and extradiegetic levels, since Grover (the diegetic 
main character) pretends to be able to directly interact with the reader (or 
extradiegetic narratee). After learning that there is a monster at the end of 
the book, Grover begs the reader to stop turning the pages to avoid meeting 
the monster: “Listen, I have an idea. If you do not turn any pages, we will 
never get to the end of this book. [...] So please do not turn the page.” When he 
realizes that the reader ignores him (“You turned the page!”), Grover invents 
more and more complicated obstacles, such as nailing the pages or building a 
wall between one page and the next one; of course, nothing can prevent the 
reader from proceeding and, at the end, we discover that the monster is Grover 
himself: “Well, look at that! This is the end of the book and the only one here 
is... Me. I, lovable, furry old Grover am the Monster at the end of this book.” 

Howis this story reinterpreted in the Supernatural episode? While investi- 
gating in a comic shop, Sam and Dean are shocked to discover a series of books 


330 WORLD BUILDING 


18.1 and 18.2: Supernatural 4x18, The Monster at the End of This Book 


titled “Supernatural” that documents their lives over the past four years and 
has a massive online fandom.” After proving their profound knowledge of the 
novels (that is, of their own lives, and of the TV series) to the publisher, they 
succeed in meeting the writer, Carver Edlund (pen name of Chuck Shurley); 
we learn that the stories come to him in visions because he is a prophet and 
that his books will one day be known as the Winchester Gospels. 

Ata closer glance, we immediately realize that the episode is marked by 
a sort of radical mise en abyme, rather than metalepsis: an embedded tale, 
the literary saga of “Supernatural”, coincides exactly with the embedding 
tale (the TV series Supernatural), which, in turn, represents a world given 


THE MONSTER AT THE END OF THIS BOOK 331 


as real (the everyday life of the Winchester brothers). Yet, even if there is no 
actual transgression between the two levels, metalepsis marks the episode 
in the form of a blend, or transgressive fusion, between the diegetic and 
the metadiegetic worlds and, consequently, between what is represented 
as “reality” and what is represented as fiction. There is a complete and 
paradoxical identification between reality and fiction, and the vertiginous 
uneasiness felt by the brothers as they discover that they also are charac- 
ters of a book seems indeed to actualize the “unacceptable” hypothesis 
suggested by Genette: “The most troubling thing about metalepsis indeed 
lies in this unacceptable and insistent hypothesis, that the extradiegetic is 
perhaps always diegetic and that the narrator and his narratees—you and 
I—perhaps belong to some narrative” (Genette 1980, 236). Furthermore, 
this paradoxical identity makes the boundary between the two domains 
porous, permeable, or even completely indistinguishable: the writer is a 
prophet, every fictional word he writes is bound to happen in reality, and 
so the Winchester brothers are allowed to pick up information from the 
fiction in order to try to change the course of events in the real world. 

The relationship between metalepsis and fandom also marks the begin- 
ning of season five. In the first episode (Sympathy for the Devil), we meet 
Becky Rosen, a huge fan of the “Supernatural” novels. While she is writing 
a piece of fan fiction,** the writer of the books, Carver Edlund, contacts 
her and she does not hesitate to express her unconditional devotion. The 
dialogue that follows is quite illuminating: 


Chuck: I need you to get a message to Sam and Dean. Okay? 

Becky: Look, Mr. Edlund... Yes, I’m a fan, but I really don’t appreciate 
being mocked. I know that Supernatural’s just a book, okay? I know the 
difference between fantasy and reality. 

Chuck: Becky, it’s all real. 

Becky: I knew it! 


As we can see, Supernatural directly addresses the new “rules of the game” 
discussed by Elsaesser, and delights in the extraordinary ontological im- 
plications of having one of the basic rules of fandom (i.e. taking the world 
depicted as real, go beyond the transformative and creative practices and 
personal relationships in online communities). 

Season five also offers the best-known and, so to speak, most literal case 
of ontological and intertextual metalepsis.** The episode “Changing Chan- 
nels” mysteriously starts, ex abrupto, with an explicitly artificial setting 
that can easily be linked to a sitcom style—likewise, to the sitcom style 


332 WORLD BUILDING 


eee isch oe 
Eric KRIPKE 


18.3, 18.4, 18.5: Supernatural 5x08, Changing Channels 


THE MONSTER AT THE END OF THIS BOOK 333 


can also be related the clear parody of the main traits of the protagonists 
(such as Dean’s reputation as a playboy). After an opening-title sequence 
that mimics those of sitcoms from the 1980s, we go back to the ordinary 
world of Supernatural through a trompe-lceil: in fact, the first image given 
as diegetic is immediately revealed as metadiegetic, since it is related to a 
hospital show that Dean is watching on TV, titled “Dr. Sexy, MD’—clearly 
a parody of Grey’s Anatomy”’. 

Then a new investigation starts, but as soon as the brothers understand 
that they are dealing with a trickster, they find themselves literally trapped 
(or relocated, in a metaleptic sense) in a series of different TV shows: first 
the hospital show “Dr. Sexy” and subsequently a Japanese game show, a com- 
mercial for genital herpes treatment,” the sitcom again, and a procedural 
cop show that clearly mimics CSI: Miami. When we are finally persuaded 
that we are back at the diegetic level, we must realize that the diegetic is 
once more metadiegetic: we are now trapped in the TV show Knight Rider 
and Sam has been transformed into the car.”8 

One of the most interesting aspects about “Changing Channels” is that 
the metaleptic experiment had already been proposed by fans more than 
a year before the episode's broadcast.” In May 2008,” vidder Sarah House, 
known in the community as Ash48, posted the vid Channel Hopping” on 
YouTube, which begins with the familiar image of Dean sitting on the couch, 
drinking beer, and watching TV. When Dean changes the channel, brief clips 
from well-known TV shows (such as Starsky & Hutch, ER, Knight Rider, The 
Twilight Zone, Buffy the Vampire Slayer, Mission: Impossible, and Friends) 


18.6: Supernatural 5x08, Changing Channels 


334 WORLD BUILDING 


start to follow one another, separated by the “reverse shot” of Sam and Dean 
in the role of spectators. The clips are clearly identified by their original 
leitmotif and are composed visually of short sequences or shots taken from 
Supernatural, so that Sam and Dean are comically relocated into a series 
of more or less unfamiliar fictional worlds. 

Almost two years later, after the experience of “Changing Channels’, 
Ash48 created a second metaleptic vid titled Channel Surfing. Her only 
comment was: “Sam and Dean watch more TV.” The vid celebrates the 
“Supernatural” literary saga featured in the episode “The Monster at the 
End of This Book’; it also extensively quotes from the canon of “Changing 
Channels” and relocates the Winchester brothers to new and varied fictional 
universes: from Dexter” to Lost, from CSI: Miami to Nip/Tuck** and Gilmore 
Girls. With her vid, Ash48 fulfills, so to speak, the paradoxical desire 
expressed by Dean in the ending of “Changing Channels”: “Well TIl tell you 
one thing. Right about now I wish I was back in a TV show.” 


Concluding remarks 


The ability to build worlds, which is common to all the arts (from cinema to 
painting, from theater to literature), appears as “amplified” in contemporary 
TV shows and, more generally speaking, in the contemporary convergent 
and participatory culture. This amplification, which encourages and is 
enabled by multi-platform narratives and vast narrative ecosystems, can 
be effectively described through the notions of “hyperdiegesis” or “narrative 
complexity” and can be usefully put in relation to fandom practices. 

In this respect, metalepsis and trompe-lceil can be profitably included 
among complex storytelling devices and play a significant role in the crea- 
tion of transmedia expansions that blur the distinction between reality and 
fiction, as well as in the relationship between fandom and serial narratives. 
In fact, as far as it is used as a narrative strategy both in the core audiovisual 
product (such as the TV show Supernatural) and in the fan works (such as 
the vids Channel Hopping and Channel Surfing), metalepsis can productively 
interact with the rule that “the world depicted is taken as real”— or, in other 
words, that the movie, or the TV show, are treated as real life.*° 

In addition to ironically unveiling or breaking the fictional pact and/ 
or creating a profound sense of “ontological vertigo”, metalepsis is able to 
operate outside the fictional contract and to produce an effect of real pres- 
ence of the worlds represented within a narrative. In this sense, metalepsis 
both encourages and expresses the multiple ways in which fans incorporate 


THE MONSTER AT THE END OF THIS BOOK 335 


narrative worlds into the everyday world or, more precisely, how fans use 
fictional worlds in their common life—in their everyday activity of making 
worlds by making versions. In this respect, it would be interesting to discuss 
further the connection between metalepsis and the rule of “taking the world 
depicted as real” in light of Francesco Casetti’s idea of relocated cinema as 
an “hypertopic art”: 


If the darkened movie theater implied that I would literally go to the 
cinema, in these new environments it is as if the cinema comes to 
me. Moreover, if, in the movie theater, cinema allowed us to travel to 
other worlds, in these new environments it makes these worlds available 
wherever I happen to be, placing them in my hand, so to speak. [...] We 
can summarize this new situation by saying that we find ourselves not 
before heterotopias—that is, as Michel Foucault has explained, spaces 
with points of passage toward different dimensions—but rather before 
hypertopias, points that attract and absorb other ones into themselves. 
The early cinema, with its ability to strike the spectator viscerally rather 
than absorbing him into the narration, already experimented with the 
hypertopia. Today, relocated cinema can move more freely in this direc- 
tion. (Casetti 2015: 12)*” 


Notes 


1. My translation. 

2. In Hills’ words, “endlessly deferred narrative’ is [...] distinct from the decen- 
tred narrative non-resolution of soap operas, which always continue to pose 
a number of questions, none of particular priority or significance, even 
while (temporarily) resolving elements of ongoing stories. The cult form, by 
contrast, typically focuses its endlessly deferred narrative around a singular 
question or related set of questions. This ‘endlessly deferred narrative’ typi- 
cally lends the cult programme both its encapsulated identity and its title; 
consider, for example The Prisoner [...] and The Hitch-hiker’s Guide to the 
Galaxy” (Hills 2002, 101). 

3. Matt Hills, “Traversing the ‘Whoniverse’: Doctor Who’s Hyperdiegesis and 
Transmedia Discontinuity/Diachrony,.” infra. 

4. Casablanca, directed by Michael Curtiz (1942; Milano: Warner home video, 
2008), Blu-ray disc. 

5. This is not the only requirement to transform a narrative into a cult object. 
According to Eco, we must also consider the possibility of breaking, dislocat- 
ing, and unhinging it as well as of detecting in it “intertextual archetypes”. 

6. Supernatural, The WB/The CW, 2005-present. 


336 


10. 


I. 


12. 


13. 


14. 


15. 


WORLD BUILDING 


The Purple Rose of Cairo, directed by Woody Allen (1985; Milano: Twentieth 
Century Fox home entertainment, 2008), DVD. 

Pleasantville, directed by Gary Ross (1998; Milano: Medusa video, 1999), 
DVD. 

See, for instance: Pier and Schaeffer (eds.) 2005; Kukkonen and Klimek 
(eds.) 2011; Re 2012; Cinquegrani and Re 2014; Pier 2014. 

With respect to the definition provided by Kukkonen, it is worth specifying 
that the relationship between reality and fiction is not intrinsic to metalep- 
sis, but becomes relevant when a level (generally diegetic) is given as real 
and another level (generally metadiegetic) is given as fictional (as happens 
in most cases). A further specification concerns the extradiegetic level, 
which must not be confused with reality, even if the real reader or viewer 
has the perception to be referred to when the extradiegetic narratee is ad- 
dressed (as it happens, for instance, every time that a character looks into 
the camera). 

Stranger than Fiction, directed by Marc Forster (2006; Milano: Sony Pictures 
home entertainment, 2007), DVD. 

Of course, we need to keep in mind that “there is no essential effect in 
metalepsis—only effects that arise out of the larger narrative contexts.” Cf. 
Kukkonen 20, 12. 

The idea of trompe-lceil takes up Genette’s notion of “pseudo-diegetic”: “A 
less audacious figure, but one we can connect to metalepsis, consists of 
telling as if it were diegetic (as if it were at the same narrative level as its 
context) something that has nevertheless been presented as (or can easily 
be guessed to be) metadiegetic in its principle” (Genette 1980, 236). 
According to Sara Gwenllian-Jones, for instance, “successful fictional worlds 
[...] create an impression of spatial presence and of a solid geography, of 
gravity, height, distance, terrain, climate, and so on” (Gwenllian-Jones 2004, 
83-84). While not referring to the concept of metalepsis, Gwenllian-Jones 
further discusses this impression of spatial presence through the concept of 
virtual reality: “The concept of virtual reality supposes the possibility of im- 
mersion in a fictional cosmology. It entails a spatial and populated dimen- 
sion that supports narrative potential and affords users a strong sense of 
presence within the narrative world. In cult television series, such cosmolo- 
gies are grounded in, without being limited to, primary narratives conveyed 
through image and sound (dialogue, sound effects, and the ambience of 
nondiegetic music). [...] Their fictional worlds are therefore vast and/or 
dense with detail and are further augmented by officially produced second- 
ary texts (episode guides, novelizations, comics, computer games, and, in 
some instances, spin-off series and films) and fan- produced tertiary texts 
(fan fiction, fan art, cultural criticism, scratch videos, Web sites, screensav- 
ers, and so on)” (Gwenllian-Jones 2004, 87). 

“Vidding is a form of grassroots filmmaking in which clips from television 
shows and movies are set to music” (Coppa 2008). 


THE MONSTER AT THE END OF THIS BOOK 337 


16. 


17. 


18. 


19. 
20. 


21. 
22. 


23. 


http://vidders.net/video/i-put-you-there-1. Accessed 15 June 2016. 

Buffy the Vampire Slayer, The WB/UPN, 1997-2003. 

Lost, ABC, 2004-2010. 

Quoted in Zubernis and Larsen 2014. 

See: the entry on the Super-wiki, http://www.supernaturalwiki.com/index. 
php?title=Meta_Episodes. Accessed 15 June 2016. For further information 
about the wiki of Supernatural, see: Wilkinson 2010. For a broader account 
of metafiction as a “protean genre” see: Denis Mellier, “World Building and 
Metafiction in Contemporary Comic Books: Metalepsis and Figurative 
Process,” infra. 

This is the meaning of “meta episodes” on the wiki. 

It must be noted that hints at the reality of the production, intertextual 
references, time loops, and varied forms of “relocation” within parallel 
universes, alternate realities or different time-space continuum start to 
appear from the second season. The appearance of parallel universes and 
alternate realities is particularly important in relation to the dimension of 
cult. Sara Gwenllian-Jones, for instance, identifies “portal formats” among 
the narrative formats that characterize cult TV series: “Series such as Buffy 
the Vampire Slayer, Angel, Beauty and the Beast, and Stargate SG-1 main- 
tain a stable, contained setting at one level of reality but furnish within it 
some mechanism that opens the localized world onto an alternate reality” 
(Gwenllian-Jones 2004, 90). According to Massimo Scaglioni (2006), the 
“portal format” used in Buffy plays a fundamental role in the relationship 
between the TV show and its fandom. Moreover, in Supernatural there are 
at least two previous episodes related to metalepsis. The first (1x17), titled 
Hell House, implies metalepsis through the figure of Tulpa, which is the 
physical materialization (in everyday reality) of a fictional entity: in some 
particular cases, “taking as real” makes something to become real. The 
second episode (3x10), Dream a Little Dream of Me, proposes the metalepsis 
made popular by A Nightmare on Elm Street (Wes Craven, 1984), with the 
tragic consequences produced by the unexpected permeability between 
the dream world and the “real” world. Finally, it is worth specifying that, 
even if in this chapter we will focus on seasons 4 and 5, cases of metalep- 
sis and meta- or intertextual games keep on characterizing the show: let 
us think about the popular episode The French Mistake (6x15), reworked 

in the vid The Meta Song: The French Mistake (https://www.youtube.com/ 
watch?v=lo5LQmg_ooc. Accessed 15 June 2016), the dissemination of meta 
episodes in season 8 (8x08 Hunteri Heroici, 8x LARP and the Real Girl, 8x20 
Pac-Man Fever, 8x21 The Great Escapist) and the explicit episode Meta Fic- 
tion in season 9 (9x18). 

Including Sam girls, Dean girls and also Slash fiction: “The term slash or 
slash fiction refers to fan fiction in which two characters of the same sex 
are written in a sexual relationship”; cf. http://www.supernaturalwiki.com/ 
index.php?title=Slash. Moreover, “since the beginning of the show, some 


338 


24. 


25. 
26. 
27. 
28. 
29. 
30. 
31. 
32. 
33- 
34- 
35: 


36. 


37- 


WORLD BUILDING 


fans have had a strong allegiance to either Sam or Dean”; cf. http://www. 
supernaturalwiki.com/index.php?title=Dean_Girls and http://www.super- 
naturalwiki.com/index.php?title=Sam_Girls. Accessed 15 June 2016. 

More precisely, a “Wincest fic”. “Wincest is the term commonly used to 
describe fanfiction (or other fanworks) that depict or assume a romantic 

or sexual (i.e. Slash) relationship between Sam and Dean Winchester. It is 
one of the most popular pairings in the Supernatural fandom, along with 
Destiel or Dean/Castiel”; cf. http://www.supernaturalwiki.com/index. 
php?title=Wincest. Accessed 15 June 2016. With respect to the interaction 
between narrative strategies and fandom, it must also be noted that “only 
three days after the episode’s airing, a LiveJournal user called Samlicker81 
posted a completed version of Becky’s story—now called ‘Burning De- 
sires’-—to a Wincest fanfic community on LiveJournal” (Wilkinson 2014). 
Identified and discussed, for instance, by Fuchs 2012. 

Grey’s Anatomy, ABC, 2005-present. 

This is also a parody of a real commercial for Valtrex. 

An entity that fans have called “Sampala’. 

The episode aired on 5 November 2009. 

Thus, even before The Monster at the End of the Book, aired on 2 April 2009. 
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=FzQPbleK-GM. Accessed 15 June 2016. 
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=e7wPQSxVwfo. Accessed 15 June 2016. 
Dexter, Showtime, 2006-2013. 

Nip/Tuck, FX, 2003-2010. 

Gilmore Girls, The WB/The CW, 2000-2007. The actor Jared Padalecki, who 
plays Sam in Supernatural, played a character called Dean in Gilmore 

Girls. Both the series (see: the episode Hollywood Babylon, 2x18) and fans 
(who have renamed “The Brothers Dean” the Winchester brothers, also 
distinguishing between “Cute!Dean’” and “Hot!Dean”) have made fun of 
this double performance. Cf. http://www.supernaturalwiki.com/index. 
php?title=The_Brothers_Dean. Accessed 15 June 2016. 

Far from being limited to TV shows, the interaction between metalepsis and 
the new rule of “taking the world depicted as real” can be easily extended 
to films, and especially “mind-game films” (Elsaesser 2009). It is sufficient 
to think of the case of Inception, in which metalepsis appears both as a 
storytelling device in the movie (sometimes in the form of trompe-lceil) and 
as a strategic component in the promotional campaign—as it emerges from 
the posters (“Thought theft is real,” they threateningly announce), the ab- 
solutely credible instruction manual of the absolutely fictional PASIV (Port- 
able Automated Somnacin IntraVenous) device (http://www.pasivdevice. 
org; accessed 15 June 2016) and the mobile app, which promises to transport 
“Inception The Movie straight into your life” (http://inceptiontheapp.com; 
accessed 15 June 2016). 

See also: Introduction. 


THE MONSTER AT THE END OF THIS BOOK 339 
Works cited 


Casetti, Francesco. 2015. The Lumière Galaxy. Seven Key Words for the Cinema to 
Come. New York: Columbia University Press. 

Cinquegrani, Alessandro and Re, Valentina. 2014. L’innesto. Realtà e finzioni da 
Matrix a1Q84. Milano and Udine: Mimesis. 

Coppa, Francesca. 2008. “Women, Star Trek, and the early development of fannish 
vidding.” Transformative Works and Cultures 1. Accessed 15 June 2016. http:// 
journal.transformativeworks.org/index.php/twc/article/view/44/64. 

Eco, Umberto. 1986. “Casablanca: Cult Movies and Intertextual Collage,” In: 
Travels in Hyperreality, 197-211. San Diego, New York and London: Harcourt 
Brace Jovanovich. 

Elsaesser, Thomas. 2009. “The Mind-Game Film,” In: Puzzle Films. Complex Sto- 
rytelling in Contemporary Cinema, edited by Warren Buckland, 13-41. Oxford: 
Blackwell. 

Felschow, Laura. 2010. “Hey, check it out, there’s actually fans’: (Dis)empowerment 
and (mis)representation of cult fandom in ‘Supernatural’.” Transformative Works 
and Cultures 4. Accessed 15 June 2016. http://journal.transformativeworks.org/ 
index.php/twe/article/view/134. 

Fuchs, Michael. 2012. “Play It Again, Sam... and Dean. Temporality and Meta- 
Textuality in Supernatural,” In: Time in Television Narrative, edited by Melissa 
Ames, 82-96. Jackson: The University Press of Mississippi. 

Genette, Gérard. 1980. Narrative Discourse, translated by Jane E. Lewin. Ithaca: 
Cornell University Press. 

Goodman, Nelson. 1978. Ways of Worldmaking. Indianapolis: Hackett. 

Grasso, Aldo; and Scaglioni, Massimo. 2009. “Introduzione. Mondi possibili e 
oggetti seriali,” In: Arredo di serie. I mondi possibili della serialita televisiva 
americana, edited by Aldo Grasso and Massimo Scaglioni, 7-10. Milano: Vita 
& Pensiero. 

Gwenllian-Jones, Sara. 2004. “Virtual Reality and Cult Television,” In: Cult Television, 
edited by Sara Gwenllian-Jones and Roberta E. Pearson, 83-98. Minneapolis: 
University of Minnesota Press. 

Hills, Matt. 2002. Fan Cultures. London and New York: Routledge. 

Jenkins, Henry. 1992. Textual Poachers. New York: Routledge. 

—. Convergence Culture. 2006. New York: New York University Press. 

Jenkins, Henry; Ford, Sam, and Green, Joshua. 2013. Spreadable Media. New York 
and London: New York University Press. 

Kukkonen, Karin. 2011. “Metalepsis in Popular Culture: An Introduction,” In: 
Metalepsis in Popular Culture, edited by Karin Kukkonen and Sonja Klimek, 
1-21. Berlin and New York: De Gruyter. 


340 WORLD BUILDING 


Kukkonen, Karin and Klimek, Sonja (eds). 2011. Metalepsis in Popular Culture. 
Berlin and New York: De Gruyter. 

McHale, Brian. 1987. Postmodernist Fiction. London and New York: Routledge. 

Mittell, Jason. 2012-2013. Complex TV: The Poetics of Contemporary Television 
Storytelling, pre-publication edition. MediaCommons Press. Accessed 15 June 
2016. http://mcpress.media-commons.org/complextelevision/. 

Mittell, Jason. 2015. Complex TV: The Poetics of Contemporary Television Storytelling. 
London and New York: New York University Press. 

Pescatore, Guglielmo; Innocenti, Veronica; and Brembilla, Paola. 2014. “Selection 
and Evolution in Narrative Ecosystems. A Theoretical Framework for Narra- 
tive Prediction,” In: Multimedia and Expo Workshops (ICMEW), 2014 IEEE 
International Conference, 1-6. Accessed 15 June 2016. http://ieeexplore.ieee.org/ 
stamp/stamp.jsp?tp=&arnumber=6890658&isnumber=6890528. 

Pier, John; and Schaeffer, Jean-Marie (eds). 2005. Métalepses. Entorses au pacte de 
lareprésentation. Paris: Ecole des Hautes Etudes en Sciences Sociales. 

Pier, John. 2014. “Metalepsis” (revised version), In: The Living Handbook of Nar- 
ratology, edited by Peter Hühn et al. Hamburg: Hamburg University. Accessed 
15 June 2016. http://www.lhn.uni-hamburg.de/article/metalepsis-revised- 
version-uploaded-12-may-2014. 

Re, Valentina. 2012. Cominciare dalla fine. Studi su Genette e ilcinema. Milano and 
Udine: Mimesis. 

Scaglioni, Massimo. 2006. TV di culto. La serialita televisiva americana e il suo 
fandom. Milano: Vita & Pensiero. 

Stone, Jon. 1971. The Monster at the End of This Book, illustrated by Michael Smollin. 
Golden Books. Kindle edition. 

Tosenberger, Catherine. 2010. “Love! Valor! Supernatural!” Transformative Works 
and Cultures 4. Accessed 15 June 2016. http://journal.transformativeworks.org/ 
index.php/twc/article/view/212/167. 

Turk, Tisha. 2011. “Metalepsis in Fan Vids and Fan Fiction,” In: Metalepsis in Popular 
Culture, edited by Karin Kukkonen and Sonja Klimek, 83-103. Berlin and New 
York: De Gruyter. 

Wagner, Frank. 2002. “Glissements et déphasages: notes sur la métalepse narrative.” 
Poétique 130, 235-253. 

Wilkinson, Jules. 2014. “Post, Reblog, Follow, Tweet: Supernatural Fandom and 
Social Media,” In: Supernatural, edited by Lynn Zubernis and Katherine Larsen. 
Bristol and Chicago: Intellect. Kindle edition. 

Wolf, Werner. 2005. “Metalepsis as a Transgeneric and Transmedial Phenomenon: 
A Case Study of ‘Exporting’ Narratological Concepts,” In: Narratology beyond 
Literary Criticism: Mediality, Disciplinarity, edited by Jan Christoph Meister, 
83-107. Berlin: de Gruyter. 


THE MONSTER AT THE END OF THIS BOOK 341 


Zubernis, Lynn; and Larsen, Katherine (eds). 2014. Supernatural. Bristol and 
Chicago: Intellect. Kindle edition. 

Zubernis, Lynn; and Larsen, Katherine. 2014. “Introduction,” In: Supernatural, 
edited by Lynn Zubernis and Katherine Larsen. Bristol and Chicago: Intellect. 
Kindle edition. 


Media Cited 


Buffy the Vampire Slayer. The WB/UPN. 1997-2003. 

Casablanca. Directed by Michael Curtiz. 1942. Milano: Warner home video, 2008. 
Blu-ray disc. 

Channel Hopping. By Ash. 2008. Fan vid. https://www.youtube.com/ 
watch?v=FzQPbleK-GM. Accessed 15 June 2016. 

Channel Surfing. By Ash and Maichan. 2010. Fan vid. https://www.youtube.com/ 
watch? v=e7wPQSxVwfo. Accessed 15 June 2016. 

CSI: Miami. CBS. 2002-2012. 

Dexter. Showtime. 2006-2013. 

Gilmore Girls. The WB/The CW. 2000-2007. 

Grey’s Anatomy. ABC. 2005-present. 

I Put You There. By Laura Shapiro and Lithium Doll. 2006. Fan vid. Accessed 15 

June 2016. http://vidders.net/video/i-put-you-there-1. 

Inception. Directed by Christopher Nolan. 2010. Accessed 15 June 2016. 

https://www.netflix.com/browse. 

Knight Rider. NBC. 1982-1986. 

Lost, ABC, 2004-2010. 

The Meta Song: The French Mistake. By Ash. 2011. Fan vid. https://www.youtube. 
com/watch?v=lo5LQmg_ooc. Accessed 15 June 2016. 

A Nightmare on Elm Street. Directed by Wes Craven 1984. Milano: Warner home 
video, 2010. DVD. 

Nip/Tuck. FX. 2003-2010. 

Pleasantville. Directed by Gary Ross. 1998. Milano: Medusa video, 1999. DVD. 

The Purple Rose of Cairo. Directed by Woody Allen. 1985. Milano: Twentieth Century 
Fox home entertainment, 2008. DVD. 

Stranger than Fiction. Directed by Marc Forster. 2006. Milano: Sony Pictures home 
entertainment, 2007. DVD. 

Supernatural. The WB/The CW. 2005-present. 


342 WORLD BUILDING 


About the author 


Valentina Re is Associate Professor at Link Campus University of Rome. 
In 2005 she obtained a Ph.D. in Film Studies at the University of Bologna. 
From 2009 to 2014, she was Assistant Professor at Ca’ Foscari University of 
Venice. She is senior editor of the journal Cinéma & Cie and a member of 
the Editorial Board of the journal Cinergie. She is also co-editor of the book 
series “Innesti / Crossroads” and “Narrazioni seriali” (Serial narratives). 
Among her publications are the books, Linnesto. Realtà e finzioni da Matrix a 
1Q84 (Mimesis 2014, coauthored with A. Cinquegrani), Cominciare dalla fine. 
Studi su Genette e il cinema (Mimesis 2012), Play the movie. ILDVD e le nuove 
forme dell'esperienza audiovisiva (Kaplan 2010, coedited with L. Quaresima). 


19. 


Traversing the “Whoniverse” 


Doctor Who’s Hyperdiegesis and Transmedia Discontinuity/ 
Diachrony 


Matt Hills 


Boni, Marta (ed.), World Building. Transmedia, Fans, Industries. Amster- 
dam University Press, 2017 


DOT: 10.5117/9789089647566/CH19 


Abstract 

This chapter argues that the world building of long-running media 
franchises cannot be seen purely as a matter of textual attributes and 
instead partly emerges over time as a result of fans’ reading strategies. 
Taking Doctor Who (BBC TV, 1963—) as a case study, it is suggested here 
that fans and official producers have co-created the ‘Whoniverse’ across 
decades—not simply because small numbers of privileged fans have 
become producers/writers/showrunners, but also because fan interpreta- 
tions have been diachronically recognized within the program’s canon. 
Doctor Who has been marked by textual discontinuity, but fan audiences 
have playfully reconstructed its diegetic contradictions into coherent 
accounts of the Whoniverse. As such, fan practices have helped to generate 
and to conserve an integrated transmedial world. 


Keywords: Doctor Who, fandom, hyperdiegesis, transmedia 


In this chapter, I'll return to a concept I introduced in Fan Cultures (Hills 


2002, 137), considering how it can inform debates surrounding transmedia 


and world building. That concept is “hyperdiegesis”: 


a vast and detailed narrative space, only a fraction of which is ever 


directly seen [...] within the text, but which [...] appears to operate ac- 


cording to principles of internal logic and extension [...] stimulating 


creative speculation and providing a trusted environment for affective 


play. (Hills 2002, 137—8) 


344 WORLD BUILDING 


used this term to think about how cult texts offer up hyperdiegetic realms 
for their fans to learn about, become immersed in, and playfully transform, 
whether by playing trivia games, consuming episode guides, or writing fan 
fiction. I suggested that a combination of topophilic detail and coherence/ 
extensibility act as incitements to fan creativity and affect. However, as 
Elizabeth Evans has noted, “transmedia storytelling offers an expansion 
of [...] Hills’ theory of [...] hyperdiegesis” (Evans 2011, 28). This is because, 
increasingly, rather than narrative gaps being left for fans to speculate over, 
“the moments that are missing from the source text [can] become manifest 
[...] as the narrative world stretches across [...] platforms” (ibid, 29). 

I will examine a case study in order to complicate my earlier definition 
of “hyperdiegesis”, one that encompasses key industrial shifts in discourses 
of transmedia world building, as well as involving different generations of 
fans, producers, and producer-fans. My focus will be on the BBC science 
fiction TV series Doctor Who (1963—1989, 1996, 2005—), and the gradual, 
discontinuous creation of what has become known as the “Whoniverse’. 

There are two main arguments I want to pursue. First, that a focus on 
the “aspirations” of transmedia storytelling (Jenkins 2014, 244) is often 
too quick to assume that world building should be equated with narrative 
continuity and coherence. “Transmedia discontinuity” (Hassler-Forest 
2014, 103) can itself be a significant factor in shaping producer-fan interac- 
tions and extending hyperdiegetic worlds. Second, theories of transmedia 
worldbuilding have also over- emphasized spatiality (Fast 2012, 313). Perhaps 
appropriately for an analysis of Doctor Who—a show in which the title 
character is a “Time Lord” from Gallifrey who can travel in time and space 
thanks to his TARDIS, an extraordinary vessel disguised as a 1960s UK 
Police Box—I want to focus on the issue of temporality in relation to world 
building. This will enable me to consider how fans and official producers 
have significantly co-created the “Whoniverse” from the 1960s to today, 
both via fans occupying vital production roles and through interactions 
between the institutions of fandom and production (i.e. informal and formal 
economies of Who's creation) (Lobato and Thomas 2015, 39). First, though, 
I will consider how the narrative universe of Doctor Who has been—and 
continues to be—a far from coherent “hyperdiegesis”. 


World Building and Discontinuity 


Although the term was used in Doctor Who—A Celebration (Haining 1983, 
169), the “Whoniverse’” referred to then-televised episodes as well as Doctor 


TRAVERSING THE “WHONIVERSE” 345 


Who's producers and fan clubs. More recently, the “Whoniverse” has meant 
the show’s overarching diegetic universe, following the model of other 
pop-cultural “-verses” (Cochran 2015, 160). 

However, the Whoniverse has never been marked by consistency (Per- 
ryman 2008). As many different production teams have worked on the 
series over the years, operating in differing industrial contexts, the show 
has displayed many “contradictions (failing to respect the core consistency 
audiences expect within a franchise)’ (Jenkins 2006, 105). A number of 
infamous discrepancies include the “UNIT dating” conundrum, which is 
that lack of clarity concerning which years, or even decades, certain third 
Doctor (Jon Pertwee) stories are set in; the genesis of the Daleks, which 
presents incompatible accounts of the creatures’ history; the creation of 
the Cybermen, who appear to have hailed from two home planets; and the 
Doctor’s alien, “half-human”, or human nature, which alters according to 
whether one is watching the BBC TV series, the BBC/Fox TV Movie from 
1996, or the two 1960s Dalek movies (1965 and 1966). As Piers Britton puts 
it, if this is a hyperdiegesis, then it is a “failure”, repeatedly breaching “its 
own internal continuity [...] due to [...] sheer [...] duration and proliferation” 
(Britton 201, 17). And Colin Harvey similarly notes that although 


key storyworld elements of the Doctor Who universe—the eccentric 
protagonist [...], his ability to regenerate, the fact that [...] the TARDIS is 
bigger on the inside—have accrued over decades to become iconic signi- 
fiers of the “Whoniverse,” [...] so have multiple diegetic contradictions 
and dissonances, within the programme itself but also within multiple 
other media. (Harvey 2015, 185) 


Rather than such “diegetic contradictions and dissonances” somehow be- 
ing contingent or accidental, Felan Parker argues that the “construction 
and maintenance of franchise canon is an active, dynamic and multiple 
process that belies the complete lack of consistency or consensus inherent 
in its own construction” (2013, 158). That is, transmedia and “transfictional” 
consistency (across media and across a single medium, e.g. TV episodes) 
need to be produced via industrial paratexts and discourses; they do not 
necessarily inhere in official media texts. Acknowledging this possibil- 
ity, Marie-Laure Ryan distinguishes between forms of transmedial and 
transfictional “expansion” that can be “world-preserving’ (i.e. the narrative 
world is expanded upon without contradictions or continuity errors) and 
“modification” that, instead, fractures processes of world building into 
“related but different worlds” or worlds that “overlap” with prior continuity 


346 WORLD BUILDING 


while also differing in problematic ways (Ryan 2013, n.p.). Yet, both Parker 
and Ryan view transmedial/transfictional coherence as a matter of indus- 
trial discourses or practices: neither fully addresses the extent to which fans 
may themselves discursively convert “modifications” into “expansions”, 
rather than these analytical categories somehow remaining objectively 
rooted in “canonical” textual strategies. 

Nor does the Whoniverse settle into any newfound full coherence in its 
most recent BBC Wales’ incarnations. Neil Perryman has discussed continuity 
disagreements between the BBC online game “Blood of the Cybermen” and 
the series five (2010) episode “The Pandorica Opens’, noting that some fans 
were pragmatic in their response to contradictions regarding whether or not 
companion Amy Pond (Karen Gillan) had encountered the Cybermen: “[T]hey 
(“Blood of the Cybermen” and “The Pandorica Opens” clearly don’t fit! Moffat 
admits he sometimes just says yes to stuff | because] he’s actually focused on 
the TV product” (an anonymised fan quoted in Perryman 2014, 239). 

Continuity problems haven't just emerged between BBC Wales’ Doctor 
Who and its transmedia extensions; such issues have also afflicted spin-offs 
such as Torchwood (Perryman 2008, 31), as well as surfacing intra-textually 
in relation to the program’s own (narrative) history. Show-runner Steven 
Moffat has engaged in audacious narrative gambits such as “rebooting” 
the entire Whoniverse as well as introducing versions of companion Clara 
Oswald (Jenna Coleman) throughout the Doctor’s timeline (Hills 2015a, 8). 
The former development perplexed many fans and, in his critical analysis 
of series five, Frank Collins observes that “‘The Big Bang’ promulgates a 
slightly altered Doctor Who universe, perhaps one that is so subtly changed 
that we may never completely grasp the reality of it or, indeed, the full 
meaning of this” (Collins 2010, 239). Clara’s omnipresence throughout the 
Doctor’s past also raised the question of how the Time Lord could not have 
known who she was, with one fan commentator describing the character as 
a “Continuity Nightmare Child” due to the contradictions and uncertainties 
that her dissemination (or not) throughout the Doctor’s timeline created: 


Of course, with the fresh set of regenerations bestowed upon the Doctor 
at the end of The Time of the Doctor, the events of The Name of the 
Doctor never actually happened, and Clara, therefore, does not enter the 
Doctor’s timestream ...Is anyone else’s brain dribbling out of their ears? 
(Elliott 2014, 334—335) 


In each of these cases, Moffat appears to be less concerned with engineering 
a fully coherent Whoniverse than with creating shock effects that are suited 


TRAVERSING THE “WHONIVERSE” 347 


to respective season finales. Or, to put it another way, his focus is on the 
impact of specific story resolutions rather than on the overall coherence 
and narrative integration of Doctor Who's longer history. This may help to 
construct finale episodes as “event” TV, but it also demonstrates the tension 
between serialized narrative reveals or “modifications” and transmedia 
storytelling construed as narrative “expansion” (Ryan, online). At the same 
time, though, Moffat aligns his work on Who with discourses of art and 
authorship (Chapman 2013, 277), introducing new narrative possibilities 
that the show has never explored before, whether this involves the Doctor 
travelling back through his own past adventures (“The Big Bang”) or Clara 
hurtling into his timeline (“The Name of the Doctor”). Rather than merely 
identifying and then reproducing “rules” of the Whoniverse, Moffat’s work 
as show-runner has often operated transgressively, precisely in order to 
surprise fans and destabilize their assumptions and established knowledge. 
Thus, the Time War is undone in “The Day of the Doctor” (2013), as well as a 
new version of the Doctor, the War Doctor (John Hurt), being introduced. 

Moffat is, as a highly knowledgeable fan himself, interested in shap- 
ing novel forms of Who that subvert or complicate fan lore—not least of 
which has been his (sub)textual sexualization of the character—rather 
than integrating material into received wisdom and received back-stories. 
Just as science fiction involves imagining a “novum’—something changed 
in the norms of culture or the current knowledge of science—Moffat has 
insistently developed a “fan-cultural novum” by reimagining the possibili- 
ties of Doctor Who. World building, in this case, does not mean iterating 
more of the same—or simply adding to a stockpile of narrative facts or 
lists—it means deliberately defamiliarizing “fan culturally acquired logics 
of continuity and characterization” (Hills 2015, 9). 

This adoption of world building “discontinuity” therefore gives long-term 
fans “unexpected variations on familiar narratives’, such as a mayfly Doctor 
or a contemporary companion being introduced into canonical events like 
the first Doctor (William Hartnell) leaving Gallifrey (Hassler-Forest 2014, 103). 
But its playful, innovative engagement with fan cultural capital also works to 
comply “with the [...] narrative conventions of Quality TV” (ibid.) by stressing 
authorial agency, novelty, and complexity over fan-culturally (and transmedi- 
ally) normative shackles of established continuity (Mittell 2015, 265). 

It is tempting to analytically carve the Whoniverse’s discontinuities 
into different eras and industrial practices, with much classic Doctor Who 
offering “an expansion of the fictional world’ via tie-ins, merchandising, and 
adaptations, but without “integration [...] [with] the television programme” 
(Evans 2011, 23). By contrast, we could suggest that BBC Wales’ Who displays 


348 WORLD BUILDING 


“a shift in transmedia practice’ (ibid.) whereby narrative integration across 
media platforms and merchandising is greatly enhanced, even if errors 
are made and even while discontinuity (or neo-continuity) is embraced 
as an aesthetic, authorial principle. Yet, such a binary position—of old/ 
new Who, or an older “licensing system” versus contemporary transmedia 
discourses (Jenkins 2006, 105)—can’'t discern specific differences within 
“new Who” as well as longer-term similarities across the program’s his- 
tory. Particular events in the cultural career of BBC Wales’ Doctor Who, 


such as 50° 


anniversary commemorations in 2013, have reconfigured how 
world-building coherence is self-reflexively drawn on and displayed. In the 
webisode prequel “Night ofthe Doctor” and anniversary special “Day of the 
Doctor”, what Roberta Pearson and Maire Messenger Davies term “extended 
seriality” (2014, 128) was deployed as a kind of celebratory stunt (see, also: 
Valentina Re’s chapter in this volume). “Extended seriality” involves crafting 
explicit connections across otherwise distant, detached moments in a long- 
running franchise; here, the Whoniverse was unusually stitched together 
into what fan critics Brian J. Robb and Paul Simpson describe as a “superla- 
tive unification of classic- and new-era Doctor Who in |...] a single, unbroken 
narrative” (2015, 309). Not only were all the Doctors united in saving their 
home planet, but “Night of the Doctor” also featured the eighth Doctor, 
Paul McGann, regenerating into a new body, thus presenting long-term fans 
with a missing link in the overarching Whoniverse—something they had 
waited to see for many years, and a hyperdiegetic event that integrated the 
1996 TV Movie into BBC Wales’ Who. To see this heightened hyperdiegetic, 
transmedia integration merely as part of a wider industry shift would be 
to miss its particular status as a “gift” to fandom (Hills 2015b, 41) and as an 
anniversary “milestone moment” (Holdsworth 2011, 36). 

The binary of licensing discontinuity versus transmedia coherence also 
assumes that fandom always desires canonical narrative coherence or in- 
tegration. But inconsistencies across different production teams or eras of 
Doctor Who can facilitate creative fan retconning (“retroactive continuity”), 
as well as what Paul Booth calls “narractivity” (2010, 105) in which “fans 
assimilate individual units of narrative knowledge and, as a community, 
re-enact and reform them in new ways” (ibid., 104). Continuity errors 
facilitate fan debate and enable fans’ attempts to fill in gaps or smooth 
over contradictions (Jenkins 1992, 102—103). Such errors also mean that 
fans can treat a rickety hyperdiegesis as a series of possibilities whereby 
continuity can be “gleaned” from available options by discounting some 
and prioritizing others (Garvey 2013, p. 47—48). Such textual gleaning 
also makes hyperdiegesis “neutrosemic”’—that is, rather than fans simply 


TRAVERSING THE “WHONIVERSE” 349 


accepting strictures of canon, they can demarcate which continuity they 
favor. As Dan Hassler-Forest has pointed out, this proffers a 


flexible type of transmedia practice [and] increases the franchise’s 
commodity value dramatically because it allows for numerous entry 
points [...] [However,] this transmedia strategy in which continuity and 
discontinuity exist side by side is always in danger of proliferating in ways 
that are perceived as inauthentic and [...] unattractive to [...] established 
audiences. (2014, 104) 


Although there may be a danger of specific incarnations being viewed as 
“inauthentic” Who by fans—whether this is a half-human 1990s Doctor or 
an entirely human 1960s version in the Dalek movies—such fan evaluations 
remain open to revision over time. Cornel Sandvoss positions neutrosemy 
as a narcissistic act of self-reflection in which fans embrace versions of a fan 
object that mirrors their prior sense of self (2005, 126). Likewise, Timothy 
Corrigan argues that the “art of world-making’ builds [...] knowledges [...] 
[in] relatively closed communities who, ina sense, perform only themselves 
[...]. Within contemporary cultures of fandoms, world-building [...] and 
contemporary appropriative activities [...] describe a spirit ofan age defined 
by [...] digital narcissism” (2015, 55). 

Yet, these invocations of narcissism underplay the extent to which navi- 
gating transmedia discontinuity, as a fan and in order to actively shape a 
preferred and coherent continuity, is a dynamic process involving multiple 
factions of a fan community. Thus, contra Sandvoss, one is not locked into 
a mirroring relationship between text and self, but is instead involved in 
engaging dialogically with fan sub-communities. And contra Corrigan, 
neither is one enclosed by a community performing only itself—quite 
to the contrary, gleaning hyperdiegetic continuity out of discontinuity 
means interacting with other fans, and other factions, who have differently 
evaluated Doctor Who's merchandising, spin-offs, tie-in novels, and audios. 
Such “narractivity” hence persists in a variety of ways, rather than “old” Who 
merely frustrating fans focused on continuity and “new” post-2005 Who 
straightforwardly rewarding fannish interests. Since BBC Wales’ Doctor Who 
itself acts as a hyperdiegetic continuation of the series cancelled in 1989, 
then all preceding versions of the show remain in play in fan debate rather 
than being definitively over-written—this, too, makes it very difficult to 
separate different eras or industry discourses of transmedia, since all the 
strata in Who's hyperdiegetic development can be relevant to fandom’s 
“transmedia memory” (Harvey 2015, 182). All variations of the Whoniverse 


350 WORLD BUILDING 


remain open to fans’ gleaning for continuity in a “game” of interpretation 
(Parkin and Pearson 2012, 23). 

This state of affairs—in which Doctor Who has been and continues to 
be, marked by hyperdiegetic discontinuity—raises the issue of just how 
important fan practices have been to its world building. In the following 
section, I will argue that, over time, the Whoniverse has been significantly 
co-created by fans and official producers. World building implies a temporal 
dimension, as audiences are introduced to additional details of a narrative, 
and as creators elaborate upon a narrative universe. But such temporality 
also means that world building can be collaborative, unfolding between 
professional and fan “creators” and, hence, becoming a matter of pro-am 
(professional-amateur) “world-sharing” as well as being distributed across 
different production teams (Johnson 2013, 109). Indeed, world building 
can also traverse generational time, as fans become media professionals 
in their own right. 


World Building and Diachrony 


When I introduced the notion of hyperdiegesis in Fan Cultures, I viewed this 
as a textual attribute, “a vast and detailed narrative space, only a fraction 
of which is ever directly seen [...] within the text” (Hills 2002, 137). The 
difficulty of viewing narrative spaces in this way is that such a textualist 


u 


perspective neglects audiences’ “narractivity” (Booth 2010, 105) and the ex- 
tent to which, as Henry Jenkins notes in Convergence Culture, world building 
is “bigger even than the franchise—since fan speculation and elaborations 
also expand the world in a variety of directions” (2006, 114). Even here, 
though, Jenkins places fans’ contributions to world building “outside” the 
franchise (i.e. as non-canonical and happening elsewhere, beyond primary 
textual confines as a kind of “meta-text”) (Jenkins, 1992, 98). Mark J.P. Wolf, 


in Building Imaginary Worlds, makes a related assumption: 


Fans who are serious about contributing canonical material to a world can 
become employees or freelancers, or in some cases, even the torchbearers 
assigned to continue a world (as is the case with lifelong Doctor Who fan 
Steven Moffat [...]). However [...] the majority of them are on the lower 
end of the hierarchies of authorship. (2012, 280) 


Again, this suggests that the majority of fan contributions to world building 
occur as non-canon, exceptions to this rule happening only when fans enter 


TRAVERSING THE “WHONIVERSE” 351 


the official production process as media professionals, whether working 
as “torchbearers’” (i.e. showrunners in positions of textual authority) or as 
“freelancers” (i.e. as tie-in authors subordinated to franchise guidelines; 
see: Clarke 2013, 79 and 85; Johnson 2013, 150). There is a type of pro-am 
“world-sharing among creative workers and communities” here (Johnson 
2013, 109), but it is one in which fan contributions to world building tend 
to be recognized and accrue forms of authority, only on the basis of show- 
runner-fandom or other varieties of professionalized fan status. 

Set against such accounts, I want to suggest that viewing Doctor Who’s 
hyperdiegesis as textual—and, hence, as locked into canonical narrative 
universes—means neglecting the extent to which formal (producer) and 
informal (fan) economies surrounding the show can interact over time, 
and not only via the mediating lenses of professionalized or corporately 
“enfranchised’” fandom (ibid., 229). Hyperdiegesis can, instead, operate as a 
reading strategy, and, hence, as a way of narractively reading-for-coherence 
that is produced through fanworks in ways that then, potentially, feed back 
into official production. It is thus important to move from an excessively 
textualist view of hyperdiegesis to one that acknowledges the accumulative 
and diachronic significance of fan paratexts (Jenkins 1992, 988—107; Gray 
2010, 162—163 and 2015, 232). Indeed, Ramon Lobato and Julian Thomas’s 
work sets out a series of ways in which the interdependency of formal and 
informal media economies can be recognized: 


functions, effects and controls [...] provide a way of thinking about the 
boundaries and linkages between formality and informality, across 
multiple dimensions. Functions are ways that informal elements get used 
within a formal media market. [...] Effects describe what may happen toa 
particular media economy [...] when informal elements are incorporated 
into formal systems over time. Controls are ways of managing, organizing 
or understanding informality. (Lobato and Thomas 2015, 30) 


Work in fan/production studies has typically focused on the “controls” 
side of this equation, suggesting that informal practices such as fan 
tourism—where fans travel on pilgrimages to visit filming locations and 
sacralized sites linked to their beloved media texts—can be mimicked via 
“convergent incorporation” into corporate settings such as the “Doctor Who 
Experience” (Booth 2015, 120—121). In this case, Doctor Who fans’ interest in 
visiting locations linked to the show’s production in Cardiffis co-opted bya 
commercially-run BBC Worldwide exhibition and “walk-through” interac- 
tive mock-up of the program’s hyperdiegetic world, both of which are located 


352 WORLD BUILDING 


in Cardiff Bay, adjacent to the Roath Lock studios where Who is filmed. 
Similarly, fan creativity can be incorporated into industrial models via 
“consumer enfranchisement” (Johnson 2013, 230); Amazon’s “Kindle Worlds” 
initiative offers one example of this process, though Doctor Who is not one 
of its authorized franchises. Here, relations between fans and producers 
are policed from both sides (Zubernis and Larsen 2012; Hadas and Shifman 
2013, 288): producers effectively delimit how fans should be creative, and 
fans have little choice other than to assent to the rules of the game if they 
want to participate. The BBC’s 2015 “Mission Dalek” competition represented 
a Who example of this “consumer enfranchisement”, with UK fans being 
invited to use “rights-cleared assets” (i.e. authorized programme clips) to 
make and submit their own go-second digital adventures.' 

In terms of “functions,” rather different relationships between the infor- 
mal and formal can be discerned in relation to Who’s hyperdiegesis, such as 
superfan Ian Levine working on the 1980s programme as an (uncredited) 
advisor to the programme’s then-producer John Nathan-Turner, in order 
that the show’s history could be accurately honored (in actuality, this did 
not completely avoid continuity errors being made). In terms of “effects,” 
Doctor Who began to significantly incorporate informal elements into its 
formal economy during the so-called “wilderness years” when the program 
was off-air. As Miles Booy has argued: 


In 1975, when the [Doctor Who] Appreciation Society was formed, the 
show, its fans and its spin-off products were discrete entities with few 
sustained points of connection. Fandom—such as it was—was invisible 
to the general public and merchandising was mostly aimed at schoolchil- 
dren. [...] In the 1990s, in the absence of a television programme [...] the 
three once-distinct areas of “show”, merchandise and fandom |...] merged 
completely. (Booy 2012, 2) 


If, by “the early years of the new millennium, fans had completely taken 
over all official merchandise lines” (ibid., 171), then this would also set 
the stage for fans who had previously written original spin-off novels and 
built up TV experience to migrate into the official TV production at senior 
levels. One end result of this, or “effect” in Lobato and Thomas’s terms, was 
that BBC Wales’ Doctor Who acted as a kind of “fanbrand” (Hills 2010, 66 
and 2014, 110), incorporating high levels of fan knowledge and fan-cultural 
awareness along with industry/BBC norms of “360 degree commissioning” 
and transmedia practice. Indeed, it would be reasonable to argue that the 
move to a more integrated transmedia Doctor Who—albeit simultaneously 


TRAVERSING THE “WHONIVERSE” 353 


marked by continuity errors and by parallel, discontinuous audio and comic 
strip versions of the series—was itself over-determined, drawing as much 
on fannish readings-for-hyperdiegesis as on industry developments. 

These developments in fan-producer relations also illuminate the need 
for a diachronic approach to hyperdiegesis and its emergence through 
formal-informal interactions, rather than addressing such world building 
synchronically as an intra-textual formation or a matter of encyclopedic 
fan wikis. Adopting a diachronic view of world building means being able 
to consider how taxonomies of transmedia storytelling, for example, may 
not only act as different options, but may also work sequentially as ways 
in which fans can gradually move “between peripheral and central forms 
of power” in terms of (trans)media production (Fast 2012, 324). Colin B. 
Harvey’s tripartite schema of detached, devolved, and directed transmedia 
storytelling (2015, 187—189), for example, captures some fans’ career moves 
from unofficial and fan-targeted world building (e.g. the Faction Paradox 
novels that link into BBC Books’ Doctor Who New Adventures without 
using copyrighted characters) to licensed but uneasily non-canonical or 
officially over-writable world building (e.g. Big Finish audios that may not 
be recognized in televised Who) and then to strictly controlled transmedia 
extensions integrated into a canonical hyperdiegesis. Rather than simply 
existing as alternatives, the history of relations between Who fandom and 
official production has been one of movement between these modes, with 
“devolved” hyperdiegetic extension sometimes acting as an intermediary 
position between “detached” fan fiction and fully canonical or “directed” 
productivity. 

Only a limited number of fans are able to successfully pursue a career 
path from “detached” to “directed” world-building, but this does not mean 
that “rank and file” fandom has no relationship to canonical world-building 
in the Whoniverse. In fact, the end-title credit for the show’s lead character 
was altered from “Doctor Who’ to “The Doctor” in 1982 when producer John 
Nathan Turner acknowledged fan advice, only reverting to “Doctor Who” in 
2005. This latter change was presumably a result of show-runner-fan Russell 
T. Davies wanting to avoid the new show being seen as overtly fannish, as 
well as harking back to the program’s origins and the more casual, non-fan 
audience’s recollection of the title character being “Doctor Who”. It was only 
when life-long fan David Tennant took on the title role, after Who had again 
become a huge industry-recognized success, that the fan authenticity and 
fan cultural capital of “The Doctor” was officially, paratextually restored 
as an end-credit. Each shift to “The Doctor” was not a way of policing or 
controlling fans’ informal practices; it was, rather, a recognition effect within 


354 WORLD BUILDING 


the canonical TV programme of the accumulated density of (fan-culturally 
normative) paratexts that understood the character to be “the Doctor’, as 
well as fans’ hyperdiegetic speculations over the titles of renegade Time 
Lords such as the Master and the Doctor. Such interactions between infor- 
mal and formal understandings of the Whoniverse are not merely about fans 
becoming professionalized and working in/on the program itself—they are 
also a matter of fan talk, interpretation, and writing, over time, accruing a 
weight of collective validity. 

Fannish reading-for-hyperdiegesis is markedly evident in fan publica- 
tions such as Ahistory (Parkin and Pearson 2012) and Lost in Time and 
Space: An Unofficial Guide to the Uncharted Journeys of Doctor Who (Elliott 
2014). Where the former aims to compile a sequential timeline of all events 
in the Whoniverse, reconciling contradictory or “failed” hyperdiegetic 
elements, the latter compiles all of the Doctor’s adventures that have 
been referred to canonically without actually being depicted. A mass of 
conflicting information is thus organized chronologically by Lance Parkin 
and Lars Pearson, while Matthew]. Elliott treats often throwaway remarks 
(providing humor in their original narrative contexts, or demonstrating the 
Doctor to be an incorrigible name-dropper) as a further source of coherent 
world building to be catalogued and thematically grouped together. In 
each instance, these fan practices work more as world projecting rather 
than world building—that is, they desire and project a consistent, coherent 
hyperdiegesis that is very much not given canonically. By projecting the 
Whoniverse, expert fan paratexts work to anticipate and co-create the 
show’s expansive narrative world through a form of “distributed expertise” 
(Banks 2013, 114). Such “collaborative creativity aims to bring into focus 
the multiplicity of modes of production [...] Whose creativity is valued; 
whose is recognized and within which spheres?” (Condry 2013, 206). This 
co-creation does not deny the powerful institutional and creative roles 
performed by official producers, but it remains possible—even while 
noting that this is not a “genuinely ‘participatory culture” of absolute 
equals (Fast 2012, 319)—to map the variety of ways in which informal 
fan practices of world projecting and formal production practices of 
world building become diachronically intertwined and interconnected 
nonetheless. Studying similar processes in relation to anime, Ian Condry 
has written of the “soul” of anime as a matter of collaborative creativity 
and “collective energy” (2013, 111). While observing that the term “soul” 
here may carry “possibly problematic connotations” (ibid., 205), Condry 
continues to insist on it “as a kind of energy that arises [...] out of collective 
action” (ibid., 30). 


TRAVERSING THE “WHONIVERSE” 355 


Yet the notion of a “soul” to world building, emerging through collec- 
tive fan interpretations and projections of coherence, may be more than 
“problematic”. It threatens to displace any critical reading of world building 
with ineffable religiosity, despite the fact that “[c]apitalist valorization [...] 
depends on the development of worlds” (Steinberg 2012, 183). Indeed, Marc 
Steinberg draws on Maurizio Lazzarato’s work to argue “that contemporary 
capitalism is characterized not so much by the creation of products but 
by the creation of worlds” (ibid.). In such an argument, it is not that “the 
difference between a brand community member [...] and a fan [...] seem[s] 
moot” (Kozinets 2014, 171), but rather that these positions are actively made 
to coincide due to processes of “convergent incorporation” (Booth 2015, 103). 
But again, to see this only as a matter of industrial processes aiming to 
control informal fan activities means missing the ways that, diachronically, 
formal-informal interdependencies arise. 

Colin Harvey argues that “transmedia memory” can “constitute [...] a 
conflict between fans who want to remember elements [...] of a franchise's 
diegesis and the intentions of IP holders who would rather ‘non-remember’ 
specific elements” (2015, 97). But this conflict can work in more complex 
ways: in relation to the Whoniverse, it was a dominant section of fandom 
who sought to “non-remember’” and dismiss the discontinuity of the eighth 
Doctor's half-human status in the TV Movie (1996), thereby restoring 
overarching narrative coherence. This fan conflict (with other factions 
of fandom, devolved transmedia producers and TV producers) was itself 
recognized and validated in Doctor Who’s canon when show-runner-fans 
Russell T. Davies and Steven Moffat ignored the Doctor’s contentious semi- 
humanity in the show’s return, as well as in Paul McGann’s return to the 
role, in which his Doctor describes himself straightforwardly as a “Time 
Lord”. Thus, “non-memory” can migrate from fans’ world projecting to 
the canonical world building carried out by successive production teams, 
working to exnominate (if not exterminate) inconsistencies that emerged 
via the creative regeneration or reimagination of the franchise by prior 
producers. Some auteurist discontinuities are diachronically embraced 
by fandom and appreciated after the fact (Gallifrey’s radical reinvention 
in “The Deadly Assassin” in 1976 proved to be one such case), whereas 
others are consigned to fannish and canonical “non-memory” over time. 
Rather than “world-sharing” across different production teams and across 
formal-informal interactions, “producers and communities within media 
franchising [...] make claims to creative identity [...] In making these claims 
to creativity, moreover, these producers often pursue textual strategies 
of difference” (Johnson 2013, 151). But not all such claims, and all such 


356 WORLD BUILDING 


differences or discontinuities, are carried forward: in some cases, there 
is in fact a kind of world blocking, as previous creative reinventions are 
dropped, edited out, and non-remembered. In such cases, fans are not 
coincident with members of a brand community, as their conflictual “non- 
memory” can be a way of seeking to deny unwanted canonical twists and 
developments that are viewed as very much going in “the wrong direction” 
(Fast 2012, 319). 

To conclude, the Whoniverse has been marked by “transmedia discon- 
tinuity”, and this is something that persists in its current incarnations. 
However, such discontinuity—linked to an array of versions of Doctor 
Who whose canonical status is unclear—means that fans can select which 
continuities they favor, as well as carry out activities of world projecting 
in the form of debating textual evidence. Such discontinuity cannot solely 
be aligned with fan frustrations over “inauthentic” Who—it is rooted in 
the program’s history, and facilitates fan creativity while condensing to- 
gether what are otherwise assumed to be different models of transmedia 
practice. Discontinuity emerges, perhaps unexpectedly, via the work of 
show-runner-fans, especially Steven Moffat’s shaping of a “fan-cultural 
novum” that challenges established fan lore in ways aligned with auteurist 
discourse. 

The Whoniverse also needs to be considered diachronically. It has no 
singular “big bang”; it has coalesced over time, with the Doctor's home 
planet first being named as Gallifrey in 1969, despite the program beginning 
in 1963. Importantly, the Whoniverse has also emerged diachronically as 
a result of interactions and relations between fandom and official produc- 
tion; as Carlos Scolari, Paolo Bertetti, and Matthew Freeman have noted, 
“transmedia storytelling has been not only a narrative practice but also a 
social one across a range of historical moments’ (Scolari, Bertetti, and Free- 
man 2014, 75). Fans’ meta-textual world projecting has led to reconfigured 
world building within Doctor Who’s canon, even down to the naming of the 
lead character. Fan constructions of a coherent Whoniverse have also been 
mediated via what Colin Harvey terms “devolved” transmedia storytelling, 
as well as through strategic “non-memory”, such as the eighth Doctor’s 
half-human nature latterly being ignored by show-runner-fans. 

Although world building may sometimes be assumed to be a matter of 
(transmedia) narrative integration and coherence, this chapter has argued 
that vast world building can flourish, over many years, while such criteria 
aren't observed. Fans have co-created the Whoniverse in ways that are 
not merely “controlled” by official producers but are also diachronically 
recognized within the program’s canon. As such, narratologically separating 


TRAVERSING THE “WHONIVERSE” 357 


out transfictional/transmedia “modifications” of a diegetic world and 
“expansions” of that world (Ryan 2013, n.p.)—in which the former fracture 
world building coherence and the latter preserve a singular transmedial 
world—fails to perceive how fan audiences can themselves manage contra- 
dictory textual “modifications” and reconstruct them, over time, as “expan- 
sions” of the Whoniverse. Seriality and transmediality are fundamentally 
interwoven here, with fan practices helping to generate and conserve a 
transmedial world in the face of serialized textual differences, dissonances, 
and contradictions (often occurring across different production teams 
in a very long-running show such as Doctor Who). Hyperdiegesis, I have 
argued—contra my prior use of the term—is not just a textual attribute 
inciting fan affects/speculations. Rather, it is the medium and the outcome 
of Doctor Who fans’ world-projecting activities. 


Note 


1. http://www.bbc.co.uk/programmes/articles/1RwGn6jirHGRJKjwzBFm25t/ 
mission-dalek-competition-uk-residents-only. 


Works Cited 


Banks, John. 2013. Co-creating Videogames. London and New York: Bloomsbury 
Academic. 

Booth, Paul. 2010. Digital Fandom: New Media Studies. New York: Peter Lang. 

—. 2015. Playing Fans: Negotiating Fandom and Media in the Digital Age. Iowa City: 
University of lowa Press. 

Booy, Miles. 2012. Love and Monsters: The Doctor Who Experience, 1979 to the Present. 
London: I.B. Tauris. 

Britton, Piers D. 2011. TARDISbound: Navigating the Universes of Doctor Who. 
London and New York: I.B. Tauris. 

Chapman, James. 2013. Inside the TARDIS: The Worlds of Doctor Who—New Revised 
Edition. London and New York: I.B. Tauris. 

Clarke, MJ. 2013. Transmedia Television: New Trends in Network Serial Production. 
New York and London: Bloomsbury Academic. 

Cochran, Tanya R. 2015. “From Angel to Much Ado: Cross-Textual Catharsis, Kines- 
thetic Empathy and Whedonverse Fandom,” In: Popular Media Cultures: Fans, 
Audiences and Paratexts, edited by Lincoln Geraghty, 149—163. Basingstoke 
and New York: Palgrave Macmillan. 


358 WORLD BUILDING 


Collins, Frank. 2010. Doctor Who: The Pandorica Opens—Exploring the worlds of 
the Eleventh Doctor. Cambridge: Classic TV Press. 

Condry, Ian. 2013. The Soul of Anime: Collaborative Creativity and Japan’s Media 
Success Story. Durham and London: Duke University Press. 

Corrigan, Timothy. 2015. “Emerging from Converging Cultures: Circulation, Adap- 
tation, and Value,” In: The Politics of Adaptation, edited by Dan Hassler-Forest 
and Pascal Nicklas, 53—65. New York and Basingstoke: Palgrave Macmillan. 

Elliott, Matthew J. 2014. Lost in Time and Space: An Unofficial Guide to the Uncharted 
Journeys of Doctor Who. New York: Hasslein Books. 

Evans, Elizabeth. 2011. Transmedia Television: Audiences, New Media and Daily 
Life. New York and London: Routledge. 

Fast, Karin. 2012. More than Meets the Eye: Transmedial Entertainment as a Site of 
Pleasure, Resistance and Exploitation. PhD thesis, Karlstad: Karlstad University. 

Gruber Garvey, Ellen. 2013. Writing with Scissors: American Scrapbooks from the 
Civil War to the Harlem Renaissance. Oxford: Oxford University Press. 

Gray, Jonathan. 2010. Show Sold Separately: Promos, Spoilers, and Other Media 
Paratexts. New York: New York University Press. 

—. 2015. “Afterword: Studying Media with and without Paratexts,” In: Popular 
Media Cultures: Fans, Audiences and Paratexts, edited by Lincoln Geraghty, 
230-237. Basingstoke and New York: Palgrave Macmillan. 

Hadas, Leora and Shifman, Limor. 2013. “Keeping the Elite Powerless: Fan-Producer 
Relations in the ‘Nu Who’ (and New YOU) Era,” Critical Studies in Media Com- 
munication, 30:4. 275—291. 

Haining, Peter. 1983. Doctor Who—A Celebration. London: W H Allen. 

Harvey, Colin B. 2015. Fantastic Transmedia. Basingstoke and New York: Palgrave 
Macmillan. 

Hassler-Forest, Dan. 2014. “The Walking Dead: Quality Television, Transmedia 
Serialization and Zombies,” In: Serialization in Popular Culture, edited by Rob 
Allen and Thijs van den Berg, 91-105. New York and London: Routledge. 

Hills, Matt. 2002. Fan Cultures. London and New York: Routledge. 

—. 2010. Triumph of a Time Lord: Regenerating Doctor Who in the Twenty-first 
Century. London: I.B. Tauris. 

—. 2014. “When Doctor Who Enters Its Own Timeline: The Database Aesthetics 
and Hyperdiegesis of Multi-Doctor Stories,” Critical Studies in Television, 9:1, 
95—113. 

—. 2015a. “The expertise of digital fandom as a ‘community of practice’: Exploring 
the narrative universe of Doctor Who,” Convergence, Online First—24 April, 
1—15. 

—. 2015b. Doctor Who: The Unfolding Event. Basingstoke and New York: Palgrave 
Macmillan. 


TRAVERSING THE “WHONIVERSE” 359 


Holdsworth, Amy. 2011. Television, Memory and Nostalgia. Basingstoke and New 
York: Palgrave Macmillan. 

Jenkins, Henry. 1992. Textual Poachers. New York and London: Routledge, 1992. 

—. 2006. Convergence Culture: Where Old and New Media Collide. New York and 
London: New York University Press. 

—. 2014. “The Reign of the ‘Mothership’: Transmedia’s Past, Present, and Possible 
Futures,” In: Wired TV: Laboring Over an Interactive Future, edited by Denise 
Mann, 244—268. New Brunswick: Rutgers University Press. 

Johnson, Derek. 2013. Media Franchising: Creative License and Collaboration in the 
Culture Industries. New York and London: New York University Press. 

Kozinets, Robert V. 2014. “Fan Creep: Why Brands Suddenly Need Fans,” In: Wired 
TV: Laboring Over an Interactive Future, edited by Denise Mann, 161—175. New 
Brunswick: Rutgers University Press. 

Lobato, Ramon and Thomas, Julian. 2015. The Informal Media Economy. Cambridge 
and Malden: Polity Press. 

Mittell, Jason. 2015. Complex TV: The Poetics of Contemporary Television Storytelling. 
New York and London: New York University Press. 

Parker, Felan. 2013. “Millions of Voices: Star Wars, Digital Games, Fictional Worlds 
and Franchise Canon,” In: Game On, Hollywood! Essays on the Intersection of 
Video Games and Cinema, edited by Gretchen Papazian and Joseph Michael 
Sommers, 156—168. Jefferson: McFarland. 

Parkin, Lance; and Pearson, Lars. 2012. Ahistory: An Unauthorised History of the 
Doctor Who Universe—3" edition. Des Moines: Mad Norwegian Press. 

Pearson, Roberta; and Messenger Davies, Maire. 2014. Star Trek and American 
Television. Berkeley and London: University of California Press. 

Perryman, Neil. 2008. “Doctor Who and the Convergence of Media: A Case Study 


” 


in ‘Transmedia Storytelling,” Convergence, 14:1, 21—39. 

—. 2014. “I Am the Doctor!’: Transmedia Adventures in Time and Space,” In: 
Doctor Who: The Eleventh Hour—A Critical Celebration of the Matt Smith and 
Steven Moffat Era, edited by Andrew O’Day, 228—245. London and New York: 
I.B. Tauris. 

Robb, Brian J.; and Simpson, Paul. 2015. Who Beyond 50: Celebrating Five Decades 
of Doctor Who. New York: Hasslein Books. 

Ryan, Marie-Laure. 2013. “Transmedial storytelling and transfictionality,” available 
online at http://users.frii.com/mlryan/transmedia.html. 

Sandvoss, Cornel. 2005. Fans: The Mirror of Consumption. Cambridge and Malden: 
Polity Press. 

Scolari, Carlos; Bertetti, Paolo; and Freeman, Matthew. 2014. Transmedia Archaeol- 
ogy: Storytelling in the Borderlines of Science Fiction, Comics and Pulp Magazines. 
Basingstoke and New York: Palgrave Macmillan. 


360 WORLD BUILDING 


Steinberg, Marc. 2012. Anime’s Media Mix: Franchising Toys and Characters. Min- 
neapolis: University of Minnesota Press. 

Wolf, MarkJ. P. 2012. Building Imaginary Worlds: The Theory and History of Subcrea- 
tion. New York and London: Routledge. 

Zubernis, Lynn and Larsen, Katherine. 2012. Fandom at the Crossroads: Celebra- 
tion, Shame and Fan/Producer Relationships. Newcastle: Cambridge Scholars 
Publishing. 


Media Cited 


Blood of the Cybermen (2010) BBC Adventure Game (online), wr: Phil Ford, game 
developer: Sumo Digital, published by BBC Wales Interactive. 

Daleks—lInvasion Earth 2150 A.D. (1966) dr: Gordon Flemyng, wr: Milton Subotsky 
(adapted from TV episodes by Terry Nation), AARU Productions. 

‘Day of the Doctor’ (2013 Doctor Who episode) dr: Nick Hurran, wr: Steven Moffat, 
BBC Wales. 

Doctor Who (1963-1989, 1996, 2005— TV series) BBC TV, BBC/Fox co-production, 
BBC Wales. 

Doctor Who (1996, TV Movie) dr: Geoffrey Sax, wr: Matthew Jacobs, BBC TV/Fox. 

Dr Who and the Daleks (1965) dr: Gordon Flemyng, wr: Milton Subotsky (adapted 
from TV episodes by Terry Nation), AARU Productions. 

Mission Dalek (2015, user-generated content campaign) BBC/Red Bee, available 
online at http://www.bbc.co.uk/programmes/articles/in6hMLa2lvslvJQF6TBS 
fRLq/doctor-who-mission-dalek, accessed 17/10/16. 

‘Night of the Doctor’ (2013 Doctor Who webisode) dr: John Hayes, wr: Steven Moffat, 
BBC Wales. 

‘The Big Bang’ (2010 Doctor Who episode) dr: Toby Haynes, wr: Steven Moffat, BBC 
Wales. 

‘The Deadly Assassin’ (1976 Doctor Who story) dr: David Maloney, wr: Robert 
Holmes, BBC TV. 

‘The Name of the Doctor’ (2013 Doctor Who episode) dr: Saul Metzstein, wr: Steven 
Moffat, BBC Wales. 

‘The Pandorica Opens’ (2010 Doctor Who episode) dr: Toby Haynes, wr: Steven 
Moffat, BBC Wales. 

‘The Time of the Doctor’ (2013 Doctor Who episode) dr: Jamie Payne, wr: Steven 
Moffat, BBC Wales. 

Torchwood (2006-2011 TV series) BBC Wales, and BBC Worldwide/Starz. 


TRAVERSING THE “WHONIVERSE” 361 
About the author 


Matt Hills is a Professor of Media and Journalism at the University of 
Huddersfield. He is the author of six books, including Fan Cultures (2002) 
and Doctor Who: The Unfolding Event (2015); he is also the editor of New 
Dimensions of Doctor Who (2013). Matt has published widely on cult media 
and fandom, including articles in Convergence, Critical Studies in Television, 
International Journal of Cultural Studies, Journal of Fandom Studies, New 
Media and Society, New Review of Film & TV Studies, Transformative Works 
and Cultures, and Participations. 


20. Transmediaphilia, World Building, and 
the Pleasures of the Personal Digital 
Archive 


Jim Collins 


Boni, Marta (ed.), World Building. Transmedia, Fans, Industries. Amster- 
dam University Press, 2017 


DOI: 10.5117/9789089647566/CH20 


Abstract 

In this paper, I'll begin by tracing the historical context for world building 
as enactment of fandom, primarily by constructing an arc between the 
golden age of cinephilia and the current state of transmediaphilia. How do 
both of these taste ideologies depend on the acquisition of a certain kind 
of media literacy, subcultural affiliation, and modes of both accessing and 
reconfiguring popular archives made up of the accumulation of textual 
universes formerly considered to be disposable entertainment? Once 
I’ve established the most productive points of contact, I'll focus on the 
impact of portable digital devices as breeder-reactors of world building 
due the inherently transmediated nature of the devices themselves and 
the play-listing mentality of the popular archivists who use them. 


Keywords: Transmediation; World building; Digital devices; Individual 
fan; Digital subjectivity 


Within the past decade, narratives universes as different as Marvel super- 
heroes and Jane Austen have become worlds that you do something with, 
functioning not just as especially satisfying fictional realms that offer a 
unique set of delights but as instigations for further expansion and exten- 
sion. One could argue this was anticipated by the intertextuality that was 
such a prominent feature of the postmodern narratives of the 1980s that 
made it so abundantly clear that the edges of textual universes were far 
more permeable than previously imagined and escaping those strictures 
generated a new kind of entertainment value. While the generic hybridity 


TRANSMEDIAPHILIA 363 


of films such as Blade Runner, Blue Velvet, and Near Dark may have been 
fueled by an exuberant determination to appropriate and extend narra- 
tive universes, it was conducted by pedigreed creative artists like Ridley 
Scott, David Lynch, and Kathryn Bigelow. There was Blade Runner but no 
BladeRunnerland that was extended in carefully coordinated and equally 
robust uncoordinated ways. The appropriation franchise, as it were has been 
extended to conglomerates, as well as amateur fans, and a whole spectrum 
of world builders in between. Just as the extravagant intertextuality of 
postmodern narratives of the 1980s signaled a new phase in the history of 
popular storytelling that seemed to call out for media theory that could 
account for that expanded narrativity, the frenetic narrative world building 
of contemporary popular culture needs to be accounted for by new forms of 
media theory that might get a handle on the interplay between textuality 
and digital technology, and between curatorship and subjectivity. 

So then how we do build a theory of world building as a form of narrativ- 
ity that generates such robust new forms of cultural pleasure? In his book 
Building Imaginary Worlds, Mark J. P. Wolf argues that imaginary worlds 
differ from traditional media entities in that, 


they are often transnarrative and transmedial in form, encompassing 
books, films, games, video, websites and even reference works like dic- 
tionaries, glossaries, atlases, encyclopedias and more. Stories written by 
different authors can be set in the same world, so imaginary worlds can 
be transauthorial as well. Worlds that extend and expand across multiple 
media are now common and a world might even become a brand name 
or a franchise, with new stories, locations, and characters continually 
being added. (Wolf 2012, 3) 


In this article, I want to build on Wolf’s account of the structuration of 
those worlds by focusing on what animates that world building and where 
it takes place. More specifically, I investigate world building as a taste 
formation shaped by forms of transmediaphilia that are turned into built 
environments within the digital devices of individual fans. That inquiry 
necessarily involves a consideration of how “storage” has become a form of 
self-expression and identity formation a matter of assemblage. 

I'dlike to start with a tableau shot, namely one that provides us with a para- 
digmatic visualization of world building of the traditional sort that I'll then 
use as a point of departure for the examining of that animates world building 
within digital devices. The scene occurs late in Michael Chabon’s novel, The 
Amazing Adventures of Kavalier and Clay (2000), a Pulitzer Prize-winning 


364 WORLD BUILDING 


literary novel that is also an exercise in elaborate world building since that 
novel is so self-consciously built out of bits from the superhero comic books 
that Chabon has been obsessed with since childhood. The novel follows 
the lives of two Jewish cousins who become major figures in the rise of the 
Golden Age of the comic book, a Czech artist named Joe Kavalier and an 
American-born writer named Sam Clay. They enjoy great success with their 
featured character “The Escapist”, an anti-fascist superhero who combines 
characteristics of Captain America, Batman, The Phantom, and The Scarlet 
Pimpernel. Chabon fills the novel with references to Jack Kirby, Will Eisner, 
Stan Lee, Jim Steranko, Joe Schuster, and Jerry Siegel, all of whom circulate 
through this fictional universe as contemporaries of Kavalier and Clay. When 
Chabon’s narrator reflects directly on the genesis of Superman, he says, “The 
writer, Jerome Siegel had forged, through the smelting intensity of his fanati- 
cal love and compendious knowledge of the pulps and their antecedents, a 
magical alloy of several previous characters and archetypes from Samson to 
Doc Savage,” (Chabon 2000, 77). 

The novel culminates with a kind of tableau shot that is the pure distil- 
lation of world building as an ever more sophisticated exercise in “textual 
smelting” in which narrative alloys generate only more narrative alloys. 
Joe Kavalier embarks on what will become his magnum opus, a 2,256 page 
“comic book novel” entitled The Golem. As Kavalier writes this masterpiece, 
he immerses himself in an archive he has assembled, literally surrounding 
himself with stacks of complete runs of Captain America, Classics Illus- 
trated and dozens of other comics. Out of the massive comics library that 
he’s collected and curated, he manages to turn his own graphic novel into 
a “means of self-expression as potent as a Cole Porter tune in the hands of 
a Lester Young.” (ibid., 577). 

While the novel and its various inspirations are already engaged ina kind 
of transmediated relationship, Chabon’s determination to create an actual 
comic book based on the adventures of The Escapist takes that transmedia- 
tion a step further by turning the fictional Escapist comic book within his 
novel into a real Escapist comic book published by Dark Horse comics begin- 
ning in 2004, drawn by legends such as Howard Chaykin, Will Eisner, and 
William Sienkiewiscz. Most interestingly, all of these additional adventures 
share the same conceit—that The Escapist actually was a real Golden Age 
Comic book now being resurrected, complete with elaborately fictionalized 
publication information that takes as a given that the meta-fictional comic 
book invented by Chabon was an actual comic book published in the 1940s, 
which later inspired The Amazing Adventures of Kavalier and Clay. Here, we 
have narrative world building created at warp speed, imagining layers of 


TRANSMEDIAPHILIA 365 


sedimentations of previous Escapist narratives some actually written and/ 
or drawn, but most of them completely imaginary. 

This image of Joe Cavalier in epicenter of all this world building, fever- 
ishly “smelting” a graphic novel out of the stacks of comics surrounding 
him is a perfect visualization of both the archive where his world building 
takes place and the process by which he extends and expands his mega- 
metaverse. Everything is predicated on Joe’s role as a curator and his fan 
knowledge becomes a built environment. Here the mise-en-scéne envisions 
not just world building, but the taste culture that animates it. Everything 
is predicated on the arrangement of the archive. Joe’s narrative world 
building is driven by his obsessive love for the comics, which is thoroughly 
intertwined with his vast knowledge of them as a singular form of visual 
narrative. As such, his singular obsession with the comics bears a strong 
resemblance to cinephilia, a point Chabon makes repeatedly throughout 
the novel but nowhere more explicitly than when Joe goes to see Citizen 
Kane and realizes that a popular visual entertainment can be become a 
form of genuine artistic expression. 

The invocation of cinephilia is not surprising since it was the first 
and most successful taste formation committed to spinning disposable 
entertainment into gold based on the precise calibration of fan obsession. 
But how does it relate to the transmediaphilia I refer to in the title of this 
article? Constructing an arc between classical cinephilia and contemporary 
transmediaphilia is, admittedly, a rather bizarre, counter-intuitive move 
since even Wikipedia tells us that world building first emerged in the sci- 
ence fiction writers workshops in the 1970s, not the Cinématheque Francaise 
in the 1950s. If we prefer to start the history of world building with the rise of 
media conglomeration, the relevance of cinephilia seems even more dubious 
move since the films that function as high concept tent-poles within that 
business model are generally thought to be anything but art cinema. Even if 
one was determined, for some perverse need, to do a comparative analysis 
of these two philias, it would be far easier to see them as fundamentally 
contradictory phenomena and be done with it—cinephilia, after all, was 
expressed by celebrating one medium above all others and relishing its 
singularity, a point made most succinctly by Susan Sontag: 


Cinephilia-the name of a very specific kind oflove that cinema inspired. 
Each art breeds its fanatics. The love that cinema inspired was special. It 
was born of the conviction that cinema was an art form unlike any other. 
Cinema had apostles. (It was like religion). Cinema was a crusade. |...] You 
fell in love not just with actors but with cinema itself. (Sontag 1996, 135) 


366 WORLD BUILDING 


The opening scene of Bertolucci’s film The Dreamers visualizes this same 
love of cinema itself, the same need to make pilgrimages to sacred places 
such as the Cinémathèque française to congregate, because congregating 
became a way of consecrating the value of the fan ritual. This would seem 
to be anything but the relentless migratory behavior required by transme- 
diation in which the movement across multiple media is what generates 
maximum pleasure and travel to pilgrimage sites outside of your laptop 
seems somehow medieval. Cinephilia fetishized the uniqueness of the au- 
teur’s vision; transmediaphilia privileges the only elasticity of the category 
of authorship. To make matters worse, cinephilia and transmediaphlia are 
often set, implicitly or explicitly, on either side of the great digital media 
divide, which adds a generational conflict to that mix. 

So then what is the point of trying to construct some kind of historical 
arc that connects them? What can we learn about world building as form 
of passionate fandom that seems to have consigned cinephilia to media 
antiquity? I want to pursue this comparative analysis because it allows 
us to develop a far more precise understanding of the cultural value of 
media fandom and the worlds built out of those articulations of popular 
taste. I know full well that the very choice of the term as shared category 
for these two philias is itself a fraught rhetorical move since the golden 
age of cinephilia had come and gone before the advent of what is gener- 
ally thought to be fandom, and the affiliation with like-minded souls at 
cinematic pilgrimage sites was exercise in what was thought to be a highly 
cerebral form of cultural appreciation, anything but the mere enthusiasm 
usually associated with fandom. In her essay “Bachies, Bardies, Trekkies, 
and Sherlockians”, Roberta Pearson argues that “fan” is a problematic term 
for what she calls the adherents of high culture because they tend consider 
themselves anything but mere fans (2007). Despite that resistance, I want 
to use the term fan for comparative purposes because it allows us to make 
finer distinctions about what animates contemporary world building and 
how use value of media knowledge changes over time. 

Both cinephilia and transmediaphilia are enactments of fandom that 
involve a complicated interplay between narrativity, personal taste, and 
social affiliation. In each case, world building depends on a reservoir of 
accumulated narratives subject to endless re-narrativization, whether 
that reservoir be the films of auteur directors or franchise heroes. Those 
narratives form what we might now call a database (a term I'll return to 
later). But the database of narratives is inseparable from the mechanisms 
of cultural evaluation—taste always stays in the picture. Cinephilia was 
a pivotal development in the history of the use value of media knowledge 


TRANSMEDIAPHILIA 367 


because it required a specialized literacy to enact one’s fandom. By generat- 
ing its own evaluative criteria to distinguish fine films from mere movies, 
it gave value to work of certain auteurs but, at the same time, it bestowed 
value on the specialized group of viewers who were properly initiated. In 
other words, it was a theory of authorship that came with its own implicit 
theory of fandom. The co-dependent relationship of the personal vision of 
the director and the expansive cinematic literacy of the cinephile viewer 
within a new media culture it required was articulated by Alexandre Astruc 
in his legendary “Caméra Stylo” essay first published in 1948. 


It must be understood that up to now the cinema has been nothing more 
than a show. This is due to the basic fact that all films are projected in 
an auditorium. But with the development of 16mm and television, the 
day is not far off when everyone will possess a projector, will go toa local 
bookstore and hire films written on any subject. (Astruc [1948] 1968, 12). 


Cinephilia, then, was the other half of an enlightened exchange that de- 
pended on a reservoir of films but was never a matter of merely watching. 
It was an exercise of connoisseurship that generated cultural value for a 
certain way of seeing and a subculture of viewers who could talk the talk 
and participate in its rituals. This need to turn specialized knowledge into 
performativity became a kind of world building that began to redraw the 
distinctions between passionate fan and creative artist. Constructing an 
auteurist signature was itself a form of critical world building in which the 
latent was made manifest in the form of oeuvre constructed as much by 
the cinephile as by the auteur. The metaphor Peter Wollen uses to describe 
auteurism epitomizes this relationship. According to Wollen, the auteur’s 
films are like a series of dreams read symptomatically by the cinephile 
critic who builds a unified cinematic universe out of those fragments. The 
director constructs the films, but the cinephile constructs the oeuvre, which 
is itself a world built out of film narratives and taste distinctions derived 
from cinematic literacy. 

The fluidity of the relationship between cinephile fan and auteur defined 
the career arc of a variety of New Wave and Film School Generation direc- 
tors. In Godard’s A bout de souffle the characters circulate in a fictional 
universe that overlaps with Jean Pierre Melville’s film Bob Le Flambeur. 
In The Dreamers, Bertolucci fashions a world out of Godard’s Bande a part 
when his characters decide to recreate the famous run through the Louvre 
scene from the latter, and Bertolucci creates a hybrid cinematic world by 
cross-cutting between Godard’s characters and his own characters racing 


368 WORLD BUILDING 


along the same course. Perhaps the most vivid example of the cinephilia 
as a process of world building on film is the Jack Rabbit Slims sequence 
in Tarantino’s Pulp Fiction. Vincent Vega cruises through a retro-diner 
fabricated entirely out of citations to Tarantino’s favorite films, songs, and 
television series. The cinephile archive becomes narrative location, taste 
as custom-built textuality. 

While it is tempting to argue that Godard, Bertolucci, and Tarantino 
were fan-boy auteurs long before Josh Whedon and J.J. Abrams, I'd rather 
use these example for other purposes (see: Scott on the concept of fan- 
boy auteur). First, it allows us to sharpen our distinctions between world 
building and transmediation since A bout de souffle, Dreamers, and Pulp 
Fiction are all instances of elaborate world building that aren’t especially 
transmedial. One could argue that Jack Rabbit Slims sequence moves in the 
direction of transmediation insofar as the built archive includes television 
and pop music as well as favorite movies, but there is no metaverse with 
multiple points of entry. 

Another key point needs to be made about Jack Rabbit Slims, however, that 
projects us solidly into contemporary digital culture. Tarantino’s personal 
archive of cinematic pleasure anticipates exactly the kind of world building 
that fans engage in on their digital devices. Anybody with a digital device has 
the capability to construct their own transmediated version of Jack Rabbit 
Slims. Transmediation, by definition, occurs across different media and 
therefore depends on the multiplication of screens, but digital devices such 
as smart tablets and e-readers have vastly expanded the number of people 
who engage in transmediation on a regular basis. The multiple functionality 
of the device makes world building of the traditional variety infinitely 
easier if that world is built of MP3 files and websites and, as such, the Apple 
iPad or Kindle Fire could just as easily be called Additive Comprehension 
Express. What I mean by multiple functionality is the way in the smart 
device is simultaneously playback screen, personal archive, and portal to 
the internet. These are the screens on which transmediation takes place 
first by reconfiguring the relationship between media by making them all 
appear on the same playback screen. The screen on which I watch Sherlock 
or Parade’s End, is the same screen on which I read my e-book edition of 
either one and both form part of the personal digital libraries that sit inside 
that screen. When novels, films, television programs, and songs are all files 
downloadable from the same sites, all playback-able on the same portable 
devices, they are all different incarnations of the same screen culture. 

Digital devices aren’t just the newest delivery system for standard forms 
media entertainment. Their co-presence on the same playback screens, in 


TRANSMEDIAPHILIA 369 


the same personal digital archives become a new supra-medium in which 
watching, reading, listening, and surfing the net are all subsumable to the 
pleasure of playlisting. I use the term playlisting here to refer not just to 
lists of songs one might compose but as a mentalité, a way of constructing 
a more or less coherent personal identity cut to the exact measure of our 
personal cultural obsessions we assemble in our digital archives. In this 
context, world building becomes as a kind of self-assemblage in and through 
the archives behind that screen and the websites we visit. To return to the 
image of Joe Kavalier as master curator immersed in his own archive made 
out of the stacks of his favorite comics, transmediaphile world builders are 
immersed in remarkably comparable archives, virtual but nonetheless vital, 
surrounded by carefully curated private libraries of their various cultural 
obsessions. 

This self-fashioning out of the archives of cultural obsession requires a 
rigorous conception of the individual fan—exactly what has been largely 
ignored by fan studies that has privileged forms of fandom defined exclu- 
sively in terms of social networks. That there have been very few attempts 
to grapple with the notion of the individual fan within the field of fan 
studies is, to a certain extent understandable-- individual fans don’t gener- 
ate texts that can be easily analysed in the form of websites or fanfics, nor 
do they congregate in easily observable, media-magnet phenomena such 
as Comic Con. Another contributing factor to this general avoidance of the 
individual fan is that any attempts to come to terms with the individual fan 
inevitably risks returning to the halcyon days of “Screen Theory” when the 
monolithic category of “the Spectator” was a standard feature of rigorous 
film analysis. Doing fan studies depended on pluralizing that category and 
audience scholarship’s devotion to actual audiences made any theorizing 
about an individual viewer seem at best obsolete and, at worst, entirely 
counter-productive to the project of determining what audiences actually 
do with popular texts. 

While such factors may explain the avoidance of the individual fan, 
they don’t make it a non-issue, and the inability to talk about fans outside 
of social networks remains one of the most troublesome blind spots of 
contemporary fan studies. That blind-spot grows ever more enormous 
if we consider fans equipped with digital devices, devices that function 
as portals to internet sites that are the bedrock of social media fandom, 
but also private digital archives filled with private collections endlessly 
curated by individual fans who relish both the robustly social and intensely 
solitary pleasures afforded by their personal cultural obsessions on one 
and the same device. If we begin with the premise that fan pleasure is a 


370 WORLD BUILDING 


vital animating factor in shaping the world building that takes the form of 
digital built environments inside those devices, then we can’t ignore what 
individual fans do when left to their own devices. 

The need to focus on the individual fan is an argument rarely made in 
fan studies but it is stated in a compelling way by Matt Hills in his article, 
“Patterns of Surprise: The ‘Aleatory Object’ in Psychoanalytic Ethnography 
and Cyclical Fandom” (2005). In his essay, Hills details the ethnographic 
fan research he did as part of a project funded by the Arts and Humanities 
Research Board in the United Kingdom. He focuses specifically on one 
subject, Shaun, whose multiple, cyclical obsessions are the basis of Hill’s 
essay. In doing these interviews with Shaun, Hills makes a number of crucial 
discoveries about the individual subject fan 


Shaun’s account stresses transmedia consumption as a matter of course. 
His monthly ritual of online browsing and selection is very much defined 
and discussed as self-directed, despite occurring in line with the indus- 
trialization routinization of his pay dates. It is as ifShaun has established 
the rules of this activity for himself, not as part of any fan community or 
group; the periodic rite of searching for fan objects therefore is to secure 
Shaun’s distinctive individuality both in terms of his varied content and 
through the very form of his selection process. (Hills 2005, 819) 


Hills characterizes Shaun in reference to Colin Campbell's term “modern au- 
tonomous imaginative hedonism”. I have argued elsewhere that Campbell’s 
notion of “Romantic consumerism’ is especially relevant to contemporary 
processes of identity formation since he argues that modern consumerism 
depends to a very great extent on the Romantic conception of artistic crea- 
tion expanded to include audience as well as artist (Collins 2012). While he 
acknowledges the traditional wisdom-- that it was the Romantics who laid 
the foundation for the Modernist dismissal of consumer culture through 
their insistence on the singularity of artistic genius as prerequisite of genuine 
culture-- he is also struck by the fact that this theory of artistic creation, 


places almost as much emphasis upon the re-creative’ abilities of the 
reader as upon the original creative faculties of the poet [...] The reader 
is also, in that sense, assumed to be a creative artist, capable of conjuring 
up images which have the power to ‘move’ him [...] Romanticism provided 
that philosophy of ‘recreation’ necessary for a dynamic consumerism: 
a philosophy that legitimates the search for pleasure as good in itself. 
(Campbell 1987, 189) 


TRANSMEDIAPHILIA 371 


This Romantic consumer as recreative artist whose medium of personal 
expression is selective acquisition anticipates the curatorial pleasures 
enjoyed in multi-media libraries contained within the digital device, all 
of which furnish its user with an arsenal of such Romantic acquisitions, 
all shaped by logic of self-narrative. Most importantly, it is predicated on 
a form of world building that may be informed by social networks but 
nevertheless must, by necessity, be committed to the singularity of that 
selective acquisition since the novelty of self under construction is but 
determines the projection of aura onto anything that enters that built 
environment. Hills makes the essential point that, 


while there are numerous conditions involved in the formation of identity, 
many people continue to feel that who they are or want to be is bound up 
with what they value and where they find expressive quality that stirs 
them in things they can speak of, and things that seem to fly beyond 
the confines o what thy can say, even as they feel them very strongly. 
(Hills 2005, 816) 


This notion of self-definition in terms of what one values drives the 
construction of a scene like Jack Rabbit Slims in Pulp Fiction and makes 
it such a pristine example of world building fabricated out of personal 
taste distinctions in music, television, and film. The transmediated on-line 
selections of Shaun and millions of other fans like him, may be made up 
MP3 and PDF files but they form a digitally built environment just as surely 
fabricated out of taste distinctions used to fashion a sense of self as any scene 
in a Tarantino’s film. As such, one could argue that Bourdieu’s notion of 
habitus could be particularly useful way of characterizing this process but 
with some essential caveats. For my purposes, the most useful dimension of 
Bourdieu’s notion of habitus is the way he which he envisions it as a process 
that allows for subjective improvisation within a system of constraints, 


As a dynamic system of dispositions that interact with one another, it has, 
as such, a generative capacity: it is a structured principle of invention, 
similar to a generative grammar able to produce an infinite number of 
new sentences according to determinate patterns and within determinate 
limits. The habitus is a generative grammar but it is not an inborn genera- 
tive grammar as in Chomsky’s tradition which is related to the Cartesian 
tradition. It is the principle of invention, a principle of improvisation. 
The habitus generates inventions and improvisations but within limits. 
(Bourdieu 2002, 30) 


372 WORLD BUILDING 


This definition of habitus could function just as easily as a succinct account 
of the relationship between iTunes and the smart tablet in the hands of its 
user. The vast file reservoirs at iTunes and Amazon and the acquisition 
and curatorial processes needed to navigate them form a generative gram- 
mar of pure cultural distinction turned into click choices that allow for 
infinite improvisation within the libraries located in individual archives. 
This is where that generative grammar becomes a dynamic process of self- 
constitution, where file reservoir as database becomes the personalized 
library formed by the interplay between of title selection and personal lived 
experience. As such, the device incorporates the tensions between objective 
and subjective that are embedded within the notion of disposition. One 
could, of course, contend that the device as a disposition is fostered by the 
logic of digital downloading that is so near and dear to the heart of iTunes 
and Amazon-- downloading isn’t buying, its self-constitution, the digital 
version of the diary or scrapbook—but it remains a generative grammar 
without speech acts until we begin to load our devices with the cultural 
choices that are treated as forms of self-expression. The personal doesn't 
hold the Amazon library (it holds the link to that library) but it contains 
your library, improvised out of a massive but nevertheless limited range of 
choices, at which it becomes very tempting to think the iPad or the iPhone 
as iHabitus. 

Bourdieu’s notion of habitus as disposition made manifest as a dynamic 
process through the improvisations on a generative grammar may be useful 
in describing the logic of downloading but we still need a more precise sense 
of the factors that actually shape the construction of the digital archive. 
Hills also entertains the idea that habitus may a be useful foundation for 
characterizing the self in terms of selective acquisition but concludes that 


The Bourdieuian habitus allows us to analyze forms of generative 
unity across seemingly diverse fan objects, but it does not convincingly 
exhaust analysis where fan objects are felt to express authentic per- 
sonal identity... To neglect psycho-dynamic and cultural individualizing 
structurational aspects of fan experience in favor of metanarratives such 
as textual poaching, enduring fandom, or Bourdieuian habitus-based 
interpretations means reducing the diversity of empirical fan activities 
with academic, general theoretical taxonomies and representations. 
It also means discounting (as purely or only ideological) the way that 
some media fan consumers may use their fandom’s to express a sense of 
personal identity, going beyond subcultural and other social/sociological 
markers. (Hills 2005, 819) 


TRANSMEDIAPHILIA 373 


While I share Hills’ reservations about Bourdieu’s habitus model, I believe 
this sense of personal identity that exceeds social markers can only be 
theorized effectively by coupling Bourdieu’s notion of generative disposi- 
tions with a theory of the subject that defines all identity formation as a 
dynamic, additive process of self-construction. The work of Nikolas Rose 
could hardly be more relevant to our understanding of world building in 
this context because he makes heterogeneous assemblage so central to 
identity formation and the curatorial/creative activity that flows from it. In 
his seminal study Inventing Our Selves: Psychology, Power and Personhood 
(2009), Rose traces the history of subjectivity and argues convincingly that 
inthe contemporary period the self has come to be defined in terms of how 
we assemble ourselves. 


Overarching all of their differences, contemporary techniques of subjecti- 
fication operate through assembling together, in a whole variety of locales, 
an interminably hermeneutic and subjective relation to oneself [...]. In 
all of the diverse machinations of being, in all of these heterogeneous as- 
semblages, a number of themes recur: choice, fulfillment, self-discovery, 
self-realization. Contemporary practices of subjectification, that is to 
say, put into play a being who must be attached to a project of identity 
and to a secular project of “life-style”, in which life and its contingences 
become meaningful to the extent that they can be construed as a product 
of personal choice. (Rose 1998, 195) 


Rose’s operative concept of the self is indebted to Deleuze and Guattari’s 
notion of a rhizomatic self but he also incorporates Emile Benveniste’s work 
on the subject-creating properties of language that allow individuals to 
constitute themselves in language by virtue of the fact that each speaker 
sets herself up a subject by referring to herself as ‘I’ in their discourse. 
For Benveniste, pronomial forms are empty signs that become full when 
individual speakers take them up and posit themselves as subject. But 
Rose is quick to insist that the subjectifying properties of language are 
never merely a matter of pronouns. He reframes Benveniste’s concep- 
tion of self-constitution in the act of enunciation in terms of Foucault’s 
enunciative modalities, arguing that the language system in which we 
express our subjectivity is always a regime of language in which speech 
acts are configured into discursive practices. Rose makes an especially 
intriguing move by connecting the subjectifying properties of language 
to the creation of self-narratives as defined by Mary and Kenneth Gergen. 
According to Rose, 


374 WORLD BUILDING 


Memory is itself assembled [...] One’s memory of oneself as a being with 
a psychological biography, a line of development of emotion, intellect, 
will, desire, is produced through family photograph albums, the ritual 
repetition of stories, the actual or “virtual” dossier of school reports, and 
the like, the accumulation of artifacts, and the attachment of image, 
sense, and value to them, and so forth. (ibid., 180) 


One might add to that so forth, cultural artifacts in the form of MP3 and PDF 
files one assembles with the private digital archive of the smart tablet that 
can become the family album or personal scrapbook, truly a virtual dossier 
of the self as constellation of accumulated signs invested with meaning. 
The relevance of the subjectifying properties of language and the concept 
of self-narrative to the world building that is done within the digital device 
can hardly be overestimated. The file choices are, in effect, the empty pro- 
nominal signs that are filled, quite exuberantly, by individuals who construct 
their subjectivity in the act of downloading and, more importantly, in the 
acts of curatorial arrangement which converts those file choices into self- 
narrative, thereby attaching image, word, music to personal cultural memory. 
To conclude, digital devices foster two kinds of transmedial world building 
that are both enactments of media fandom. As portals to the internet, 
they encourage socially networked forms of fandom that are flamboyantly 
collaborative—as private archives, they give shape to the most intimate 
permutations of identity formation. Their multi-functionality makes them 
highly efficient navigational tools that allow access the multiple points 
of entry of narrative metaverses practically simultaneously on the same 
screen, which has undoubtedly accelerated to expansion of world building 
as a form of popular narrativity. But they also enable a curatorial mode of 
transmediation in which we build worlds out of our cultural obsessions 
within the archives that sit behind those screens. To return to the mission 
statement of this book, if spectators have become explorers and, in turn, 
world builders, we have to explore how digital devices generate a unique 
set of pleasures in reference to their own self-assemblage, and therefore 
become, to paraphrase Sontag, a kind of world-builder... unlike any other. 


Works Cited 


Astruc, Alexandre. [1948] 2009. “The Birth ofa new avant-garde: La camera-stylo,” 
translated from Ecran Français 144, In: The French New Wave, edited by Ginette 
Vincendeau and Peter Graham. New York: Doubleday. 


TRANSMEDIAPHILIA 375 


Bourdieu, Pierre. 2002. “Habitus,” In: Habitus: A Sense of Place, edited by Jean Hillier 
and Emma Rooksby. London: Press, Ashgate. 

Campbell, Colin. 1987. The Romantic Ethic and the Spirit of Modern Consumerism. 
Oxford: Basil Blackwell. 

Chabon, Michael. 2000. The Amazing Adventures of Kavalier and Clay. New York: 
Random House. 

Collins, Jim. 2012. Bring on the Books for Everybody: How Literary Culture Became 
Popular. 

Culture. Durham: Duke University Press. 

Hills, Matt. 2005. “Patterns of Surprise The ‘Aleatory Object’ in Psychoanalytic 
Ethnography and Cyclical Fandom,” American Behavioral Scientist, 48, 801-821. 

Pearson, Roberta. 2007. “Bachies, Bardies, Trekkies, and Sherlockians,” In: Fandom: 
Identities and Communities in a Mediated World, edited by Jonathan Gray, 
Cornel Sandvoss, and C. Lee Harrington, 98-109. New York: NYU Press. 

Rose, Nikolas. 1998. Inventing Our Selves: Psychology, Power, and Personhood. 
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 

Scott, Suzanne. 2013. “Who's Steering the Mothership: The Role of the Fan-boy 
Auteur in Transmedia Storytelling,” In: The Participatory Cultures Handbook, 
edited by Aaron Delwiche and Jennifer Jacobs Henderson, 43-52. New York: 
Routledge. 

Sontag, Susan. 1996. “The Decay of Cinema,” New York Times, 25 February. 

Wolf, Mark J.P. 2012. Building Imaginary Worlds. New York: Routledge. 

Wollen, Peter. 1973. Signs and Meaning in the Cinema. Bloomington: Indiana 
University Press. 


Media Cited 


Breathless (A bout de souffle). Directed by Jean-Luc Godard. 1960. New York City: 
Criterion. 2014. Blu-Ray and DVD. 

Band of Outsiders (Bande a part). 1964. Directed by Jean-Luc Godard. New York 
City: Criterion. 2013. Blu-Ray. 

Blade Runner. Directed by Ridley Scott. 1982. Burbank, CA: Warner Home Video. 
2012. Blu-Ray. 

Blue Velvet. Directed by David Lynch. 1986. Beverly Hills, CA: MGM. 2011. Blu-Ray. 

Bob le Flambeur. Directed by Jean Pierre Melville. 1956. New York City: Criterion. 
2002. DVD. 

Near Dark. Directed by Kathryn Bigelow. 1987. Santa Monica, CA: Lionsgate. 2009. 
Blu-Ray. 


376 WORLD BUILDING 


Pulp Fiction. Directed by Quentin Tarantino. 1994. Santa Monica, CA: Lionsgate/ 
Miramax. 2011. Blu-Ray. 

The Dreamers. Directed by Bernardo Bertolucci. 2003. Century City: Fox Search- 
light. 2004. DVD. 


About the author 


Jim Collins is a Professor of Film and Television at the University of Notre 
Dame where he teaches courses on media theory and digital culture. His 
most recent book is Bring on the Books for Everybody: How Literary Culture 
Became Popular Culture (Duke University Press, 2011). 


21. 


The Politics of World Building 


Heteroglossia in Janelle Monae’s Afrofuturist WondaLand 


Dan Hassler-Forest 


Boni, Marta (ed.), World Building. Transmedia, Fans, Industries. Amster- 
dam University Press, 2017 


DOI: 10.5117/9789089647566/CH21 


Abstract 

This essay approaches world building from a political point of view, arguing 
that the way in which imaginary and immersive transmedia story worlds 
are constructed in fantastic genres reflects a fundamentally political posi- 
tion. In the context of1970s countercultures and emerging identity poli- 
tics, the cultural movement of Afrofuturism provided black artists witha 
way of reversing the racist bias so prevalent in science-fiction and fantasy 
narratives. In the 21st century, Janelle Monde is an artist who has reinvig- 
orated this movement with a series of albums, music videos, and stage 
performances that adopt the cultural logic of transmedia world building, 
but do so ina way that challenges the traditional ontological structure of 
such secondary worlds. By combining Bakhtin’s concept of heteroglossia 
with Hardt and Negri’s concept of the multitude, this essay argues that 
Monae’s work represents an important challenge to the white-centric 
traditions of world building, even ifher success simultaneously must rely 
in part on the cultural logic of neoliberalism. 


Keywords: science fiction, world building, Afrofuturism, transmedia, 
Janelle Monae, Mikhail Bakhtin 


World building has become the name of the game in commercial science- 


fiction and fantasy franchises. As digital convergence continues to blur the 


boundaries between media and as multiple forms of participatory culture 


proliferate, the focus in fantastic fiction has shifted ever more strongly 


from linear storytelling to the development of coherent, recognizable, and 


ostentatiously branded storyworlds. While there is hardly anything novel 


about the commercial franchising of successful characters and narrative 


378 WORLD BUILDING 


environments, the hegemonic appropriation and commodification of 
world-building practices from fantasy and science-fiction traditions has 
come to typify the age of the global media conglomerate, from the Disney- 
owned Marvel Cinematic Universe to HBO’s cross-media juggernaut Game 
of Thrones. Most of these popular imaginary worlds offer mappable and 
therefore “knowable” environments, with a strong focus on the kind of 
consistency and coherence that pleases fan cultures, while also thriv- 
ing commercially as part of the larger political economy in which these 
multiple texts circulate as branded commodities (Johnson 2013, 6-7). 

In this context of imaginary worlds that are both commercial properties 
and sites of audience participation, the need for forms of world building that 
are politically productive grows ever larger. Janelle Monáe’s work offers a pro- 
vocative example of just this kind of process. The prodigiously talented singer, 
dancer, songwriter, producer, arranger, painter, and futurist has produced a 
body of work over the course of the past six years that is remarkable for its 
range, its technical proficiency, its musical eclecticism, and its unique take on 
the concept of world building. As a musician working with sf tropes, her world 
building is far more loosely organized than the fantastic worlds in media that 
are more preoccupied by narrative. Her concept albums, music videos, and 
stage performances contain recognizable narrative elements, but they also 
remain open to a wide variety of possible readings, while individual tracks 
can take on different meanings outside the context of an album. Monáe’s 
work has attracted a great deal of attention from critics and scholars, not only 
because of the role she has played in the revival of Afrofuturism (see: English 
and Kim 2013), but also because her socially conscious perspective has been 
enthusiastically embraced by leftists of all stripes for its progressive ideals. 

The main question I will engage with in this chapter is whether Monae’s 
work does indeed offer the kind of transgressive potential that her many 
fans have so eagerly identified in it. After first establishing the inherently 
political aspects of world building, I will describe how Afrofuturism has 
expanded the political potential of fantastic storyworlds through black 
artists’ appropriation of sf tropes. While the Afrofuturist movement 
peaked in the 1970s, in the context of multiple social, cultural, and political 
movements that challenged the assumptions of “dominant ideology”, 21st- 
century neoliberalism poses a new set of challenges for artists attempting 
to resist or subvert hegemonic capitalist culture. I will examine Monáe’s 
“neo-Afrofuturist” project from this political perspective, using Mikhail 
Bakhtin’s concept of “heteroglossia” to help describe how the unstable and 
decentered nature of her “sonic fiction” (Eshun 2003, 288) creates worlds 
that operate by a different logic than that of narrative subcreation. 


THE POLITICS OF WORLD BUILDING 379 


But while Monáe’s pop art may, on the one hand, be read as one of the 
dangerous “possible worlds” (Gilbert 2014, 192) that can help us imagine 
worlds outside of capitalism, it simultaneously fits the cultural logic of 
neoliberalism with uncanny precision. The remarkable flexibility of her 
posthuman persona certainly destabilizes and decenters the basic coordi- 
nates of her imaginary world, but this very process perfectly complements 
the context in which her work circulates in commodity form. By claiming a 
space within globally popular entertainment culture, Monae’s transmedia 
work productively navigates the critical tension between hegemonic cor- 
porate franchises and the subversive practices associated with a resistant 
culture of appropriation. 

In our post-democratic societies of control, organized through rhizomatic 
circuits of biopolitical power (ibid., 1-4), “we need to create weapons that 
are not merely destructive but are themselves a form of constituent power, 
weapons capable of constructing democracy and defeating the armies of 
Empire” (Hardt and Negri 2005, 347). The question is: how to develop and 
deploy fantastic world building as just such a weapon? While most major 
storyworlds in fantasy and sf have quite obvious anti-capitalist elements, 
the narratives typically strive to contain and delimit them. At the same 
time, processes of commercial branding and franchising further reinforce 
this unstable but largely effective inoculation. For, although the “textual 
poaching” associated with fan fiction and other forms of audience participa- 
tion has done much to destabilize and subvert this dynamic (see also: Matt 
Hills’ chapter in this volume), such activities have become, in many ways, 
even more marginal than they were before the 21st-century mainstreaming 
of post-genre fantastic fiction. Or, to put it more accurately, fans’ individual 
creative acts of subversion have become increasingly irrelevant as the media 
industries’ business model has shifted from a logic of exposure to one of 
“long-tail engagement” (Napoli 2011, 15) that better fits our digital environ- 
ment of constant immersion in connective networks (see: Van Dijck 2013; 
Rose 2011). 

Mark J.P. Wolf's study of imaginary worlds takes as its point of departure 
Tolkien’s concept of “subcreation”, which Wolf views as an inseparable 
combination of process and product resulting in the development of a ficti- 
tious “Secondary World” (2012, 24). The “secondariness” of this imaginary 
environment is a question of degree rather than of absolute separation, 
depending on the ways in which certain familiar defaults are transformed 
into imaginary alternatives: “Fictional worlds can be placed along a spec- 
trum based on the amount of subcreation present, and what we might call 
the ‘secondariness’ of a story’s world then becomes a matter of degree, 


380 WORLD BUILDING 


varying with the strength of the connection to the Primary World” (ibid., 
25). Wolf then offers an impressively detailed historical overview of many 
types of imaginary worlds, with varying levels of subcreation, each of which 
is, to some degree, separated from the ways in which the “Primary World’ is 
commonly represented. Wolf's definition of world building clearly relies on 
the assumption of an unambiguous distinction between what constitutes 
a “realistic” representation of a diegetic world and a fictional environment 
that defamiliarizes its audience from realistic defaults by altering a number 
of these coordinates. 

Navigating imaginary worlds thus becomes a primarily epistemological 
endeavor: the audience’s knowledge of a supposedly unified and coherent 
“primary” reality is required to establish the crucial degree of secondariness 
that Wolf defines as central to world building. This notion has obvious 
similarities to Darko Suvin’s classic definition of cognition as the defining 
characteristic of sf, describing both the genre’s aesthetics and its political 
values based on the “cognitive dissonance” it creates in relation to one’s 
knowledge of historical reality. Missing from Wolf's theorization of world 
building are its profoundly ontological and political implications: the 
ways in which the dialectical tension between Primary and Secondary 
Worlds can serve to destabilize absolute distinctions between past and 
future, subject and object, history and myth. As Mark Fisher has argued, 
it is precisely in this ontological dimension of imaginary worlds that we 
may find “that there are futures beyond postmodernity’s terminal time” 
(2013, 53) that can be expanded, negotiated, and explored from a political 
perspective. 

Besides this explicit deviation from realist narrative conventions, which 
is widely shared by large portions of genre fiction, a second crucial feature 
of subcreation identified by Wolfis that of scale. World-building franchises 
are typically developed not only across multiple texts, but most commonly 
also involve multiple media. For example, the world building that followed 
the release of Star Wars was as much the result of the production of toys, 
video games, television broadcasts, comic books, novelizations, and role- 
playing games as it was the mere process of producing filmed sequels. This 
proliferation of world-building activities transforms not only the nature of 
any individual fictional narrative and its associated sets of practices, values, 
and markets; it also destabilizes the prevailing discourses of individual 
authorship, especially once the audience starts contributing actively to the 
development of the imaginary world (see Brooker 2002). 

A helpful concept to explain more clearly the political implications of 
world-building is Mikhail Bakhtin’s “heteroglossia’: a term meant to indicate 


THE POLITICS OF WORLD BUILDING 381 


the coexistence of multiple varieties within a single signifying system, 
destabilizing any central conception of “unity” or single meaning (1981, 263). 
Bakhtin initially applied the concept to the novel as a literary form made up 
of radical and uncontainable difference, in contrast to scientific discourse 
or religious dogma, which he described as “authoritative” in the sense that 
the reader must yield to a single “centripetal” meaning. The cultural and 
political role of the novel—or, by extension, any other modern work of 
art—should be to draw the very concept of the authoritative into ques- 
tion by foregrounding its own hybrid nature and consequent “centrifugal” 
multiplicity of meaning. 

This concept is especially helpful when we turn our attention to transme- 
dia world building as a practice that is defined by this very tension between 
the authoritative desire to unify on the one hand and the hybrid, constructed 
nature of “heteroglot” utterances on the other. Most of the energy deployed 
by writers, producers, and critics in relation to world building has been 
directed towards the centripetal notion of the “authoritative”: the ways 
in which imaginary worlds become mappable, measurable, and navigable 
spaces with coherent chronologies, characters, and events, even when they 
cross over into other media. Frequently measured by the yardstick of “fidel- 
ity”, transmedia adaptations like Tolkien’s world of Middle-earth or the Star 
Wars franchise have established elaborate narrative canons that identify 
clearly which texts are considered part of the “real” imaginary world and 
that are discarded by the storyworlds’ “authoritative” center. 

This desire for coherence and measurability in world building has been 
central to most academic work on the topic as well, even when it takes 
into account not only the profusion of these narratives across media, but 
also the contributions made by active audiences through fan fiction and 
mash-up culture. Jonathan Gray’s Show Sold Separately (2010), for instance, 
rightfully emphasizes the importance of peripheral paratexts such as trail- 
ers, spoilers, and other intertexts that John Fiske described as “secondary” 
and “tertiary” (1987, 117-126). But Gray’s focus on the narrative coherence 
across media consistently privileges texts that add to the development of 
an authoritative storyworld in a constructive and systematically organ- 
ized manner. Gray strongly favors fan-created material that contributes to 
the narrative’s thematic coherence, such as a mash-up video that “invites 
viewers to contemplate [a] character” by adding “the time and reflective 
space |...] that the films never truly provide” (2010,156). By contrast, Gray 
dismisses the paratextual existence of a “Gotham City pizza’ in relation to 
the film The Dark Knight as a “mere marketing tool” whose sole function is 
to “signal the size of the film” (p. 209-210). 


382 WORLD BUILDING 


This exclusive focus on narrative and aesthetic coherence has 
far-reaching political implications. The desire to create, navigate, or 
otherwise engage with an imaginary world that is stable and coherent 
expresses a desire to understand what Wolf describes as the Primary 
World in similar terms. By contrast, a centrifugal approach shifts our 
focus to an environment defined by multiplicity, transformation, fluidity, 
and irresolvable internal contradictions. Such a form of world building 
rejects post-Enlightenment foundations organized around a metaphysics 
of presence in favor of what Iris Marion Young has described as a “politics 
of difference” (2010, 229)—a model that applies Jacques Derrida’s critique 
of the subject as grounded in difference from an imagined “other” to a 
sociopolitical framework based on radical diversity and constant (internal 
and external) forms of negotiation and mediation. If we therefore wish to 
discover existing cultural practices that productively employ the critical 
potential of imaginary worlds, we must turn away from fantastic fran- 
chises informed primarily by the “authoritative” discourses of centripetal 
narrative traditions and start exploring the more radical heteroglossia 
of world-building practices whose form of organization is itself more 
explicitly centrifugal. 


Afrofuturism and “Hauntological” World Building 


While the paradigmatic imaginary worlds of The Lord of the Rings and Star 
Trek have resulted in a generic tendency in fantasy and sf towards politically 
reactionary forms of cultural nostalgia, technocratic notions of progress, or 
combinations of both, more progressive alternatives have emerged that have 
taken world building in productive new directions. One such phenomenon 
has been the modest but influential revival of Afrofuturism, the cultural 
movement that emerged among black artists, authors, and musicians in 
the 1960s and 1970s as “speculative fiction that treats African-American 
themes and addresses African-American concerns in the context of 2oth- 
century technoculture” (Dery 1994, 736). The Afrofuturist project took it 
upon itself to appropriate sf imagery, which had been overwhelmingly 
white in its mainstream cultural representations, and use it to reimagine a 
past as well as a future in which people of color played central rather than 
marginal roles. From the elaborate mythology articulated by avant-garde 
jazz musician Sun Ra to the spectacular stage shows of 1970s bands like 
Parliament-Funkadelic, and Earth, Wind and Fire, Afrofuturist culture has 
adopted and expanded upon many familiar sf tropes. 


THE POLITICS OF WORLD BUILDING 383 


Afrofuturism opened up a perspective on world building that fits Der- 
rida’s “hauntological” model of an infinitely confused and deeply ambiguous 
sense of historicity (1994, 10), demanding to be interpreted as an attempt 
to “assemble counter memories that contest the historical archive, thereby 
situating the collective trauma of slavery as the founding moment of mod- 
ernity” (Eshun, 2003, 288). Rather than constructing a narrative world that 
stood apart from a single shared “Primary World’, Afrofuturism instead 
deployed concepts and iconography from fantastic genres to fracture the 
metaphysical model that has privileged one form of identity over another. 
By reversing the existing hierarchy, Afrofuturist art intervened in sf’s long- 
standing tradition of presenting color-blind futures that were “concocted 
by whites and excluded people of color as full subjects” (Bould 2007, 177), 
while, at the same time, using forms that challenge Western culture’s focus 
on narrative conventions like closure, linear causality, and teleological 
organization. 

When compared to a more conventional sf franchise like Star Trek, 
Afrofuturism as a world-building practice is fundamentally similar in 
its desire to question the present by speculating about the future. Rod- 
denberry’s utopian vision of humanity’s future has been heralded for its 
incorporation of ethnic and cultural diversity, but it remains a storyworld 
“based on a thoroughly Western vision of the importance of material wealth 
and technological modernization” (Booker 2008, 198). Afrofuturism rejects 
this incorporation of racial minorities into a larger framework of liberal 
capitalist humanism, offering instead a radical re-envisioning of the past 
in which this central dynamic is reversed. This alternative framework is 
strengthened by its inherently centrifugal form: while Star Trek, like most 
sf storyworlds, has been driven throughout its history by narrative media 
like episodic television drama, cinema, and literature, musicians have been 
the primary guiding force for the multiple “sonic fictions” of Afrofuturism 
(see: Eshun 1998). Because of this, the funky, groove-driven musical forms 
within which Afrofuturist discourse was articulated and circulated were 
as destabilizing as the speculative pasts and futures it expressed. 


Entering WondaLand: Janelle Monáe’s world building 


While the cultural work of Afrofuturists has survived in several forms within 
mainstream pop music, in which its subversive influence is noticeable in 
places as unlikely as the oeuvre of Michael Jackson (see: Steinskog 2015), 
its usefulness for world building as a cultural form that facilitates political 


384 WORLD BUILDING 


imagination requires a more inclusive framework. The difference between 
Janelle Monáe’s work and most phallocentric forms of Afrofuturism is the 
very distinction Gilbert makes between “formations which only constitute 
defensive enclaves and those which seek to widen their sphere of activity” 
(2014, 198). Unlike the “Afrocentric, masculinist, and messianic overtones” 
of George Clinton’s Parliament-Funkadelic collective (English and Kim 2013, 
220), Monae’s collection of on- and off-stage android and human personas 
is as much post-gender as it is posthuman, playfully walking the tightrope 
of celebrity culture and performativity. 

Her ongoing series of concept albums, together with her “emotion pic- 
tures”, stage performances, and media appearances offer a new, more radical 
perspective on world building that builds on Afrofuturism as much as it does 
on a2ist-century convergence culture and post-genre fantastic fiction. While 
certain elements across these media cohere loosely into narrative patterns 
and recognizable structures, these strands are interwoven with many others 
that frustrate any attempt to separate fictional characters, locations, and 
futures from a Primary World that insistently infects them. In this sense, 
Monéae’s WondaLand, both as a description of a central location within her 
imaginary world and as the name of her Atlanta-based artist collective, 
resonates strongly with Lewis Carroll’s Secondary World, in which Alice is 
never sure what she is going to be from one minute to another, and in which 
the question “Who in the world am I?” constantly frustrates our desire for 
any sense of “authoritative” stability. 

The story Monae tells in her work is elliptical and endlessly ambiguous, 
evading straightforward storytelling and instead constantly embellishing 
its imaginary world with new ideas, clues, and puzzles that are spread out 
across various media. The lavishly illustrated booklet that accompanies 
the “Special Edition” of Monáe’s first official release, Metropolis: The Chase 
Suite (2008), includes a primer on the artist’s imaginary world and its central 
character, Monae’s android alter ego Cindi Mayweather. When read together 
with the booklet illustrations, liner notes, the elaborate “official short film” 
for the track “Many Moons’ and the singer’s many interviews on the project, 
her imaginary world seems to take shape along familiar, easily recognizable 
patterns: a post-apocalyptic dystopian future ruled by “evil Wolfmasters’, 
an oppressed class of androids exploited by an oppressive upper class, and 
a heroic android protagonist whose programming includes a rock-star 
proficiency package and a working soul. 

By appropriating a wide variety of familiar tropes from sf, Monáe’s first 
transmedia project establishes a basic narrative situation, but one that 
merely serves as an entrance point into an imaginary world of competing 


THE POLITICS OF WORLD BUILDING 385 


allegorical patterns. Neither the lyrical content nor the elaborate music 
video offers any kind of narrative resolution, as Cindi is last seen in a dis- 
embodied “cyberpurgatory” state. Instead, her central figure of the android 
as an oppressed worker class of “othered” bodies relates back not only to 
the Afrodiasporic trauma of slavery and institutionalized racism, but also 
provides a remarkably flexible and slippery signifier that opens up any 
number of identification processes along lines of gender, sexuality, class, 
and religion: “androids are the ultimate exploitable ‘other, a human-like 
being who does not need to be afforded the rights of humanity” (Brandt 
2014). Unlike the general tendency in hip-hop music, pan-Africanism, and 
many other strands of black culture to insist on “keeping it real” by reject- 
ing whiteness and “adhering to the standards of the ‘black community” 
(Rambsy 2013, 205), Monae’s posthuman android points instead to the 
socially constructed nature of identity. 

While the central narrative of Cindi Mayweather has hardly progressed 
on the two albums, five “emotion pictures”, and countless live performances, 
the scope of Monáe’s imaginary world has continued to expand, as has her 
sustained use of this remarkably fluid android alter ego. In the liner notes 
accompanying her 2010 album The ArchAndroid, we learn that Monae is, 
in fact, a time-traveler from the year 2719 whose stolen DNA was used for 
the creation of Cindi Mayweather. In interviews, she has embellished this 
idea further, explaining that there is a hidden “time traveling machine” 
in her adopted city of Atlanta, through which many influential black 
musicians have passed, herself and hip-hop duo Outkast included (Lester 
2014). This playful, self-reflexive, and thoroughly fluid relationship to her 
main character and alter ego demonstrates not only her authorial claim 
upon her imaginary world, but also the constant negotiations this requires: 
by deliberately blurring the lines between her many “selves,” it becomes 
impossible to separate her Secondary World of Wolfmasters, androids, 
bounty hunters, and “robo-zillionaires” from our own Primary historical 
environment. 

Monée’s world building therefore resonates productively with Bakhtin’s 
concept of heteroglossia: the interweaving of perspectives, constantly 
shifting back and forth between her own contemporary persona and her 
28th-century alter ego, creates a paradoxical tension between past, present, 
and future in which definitions of identity and lines of causality continu- 
ously break down. Having absorbed A frofuturism’s chronopolitical take on 
fantastic fiction’s cognition and estrangement, Monde short-circuits the au- 
thoritative and centripetal systems that impose any number of boundaries: 
not only those between her science-fictional Secondary World and a more 


386 WORLD BUILDING 


“Primary” universe, but any form of limitation on the individual as part of 
a larger totality informed by power. This seemingly infinite multiplicity 
of references to other texts and personas obviously includes not only her 
embodiment of “the best memories of the last fifty years of black musical 
performance’, but also spins elastically “from David Bowie's high-concept 
theatrics to Prince’s loose-spined, funky splits and squeals [...] to Grace 
Jones’s coolly imperious robot” (Royster 2013, 187). 

But this world-building strategy based on heteroglossia and radical 
eclecticism does not result in any breakdown of meaning. Instead, both the 
fictional WondaLand described in verse on The ArchAndroid, the dreamlike 
“world inside/where dreamers meet each other”, and the actual WondaLand 
Arts Society, the Atlanta-based collective of which Monáe’s projects are 
among the most visible products, strengthen and reinforce one another. 
On her website, in interviews, and in the credits for her albums and music 
videos, the artist consistently emphasizes not only her own membership 
of the WondaLand collective, but also the fact that her work is the result 
of collaborative participation rather than purely individual accomplish- 
ment. The most utopian element in her imaginary world thus also connects 
back directly to a real-world counterpart that is similarly inclusive in its 
aspirations. At the same time, the heteroglossia of her storyworld is more 
than just a multiplicity of voices and styles contained therein: it is also the 
heterogeneous end product of a fully collaborative process undertaken by 
a functioning artist collective. 

As tempting as it is to exaggerate the ideological implications of 
Monéae’s socially conscious world building, she also clearly owes much 
of her success to her compatibility with the cultural logic of neoliberal 
capitalism. Her desire to make her alter ego Cindi Mayweather an all- 
purpose stand-in for those suffering oppression simultaneously runs the 
risk of separating this critique from any specific power formation or set 
of social relations. While the progressive values she articulates in terms 
of race and gender come through loud and clear, her oblique perspective 
on capitalism is far more ambivalent. The attention and expense that 
goes into the production, packaging, and marketing of her albums dem- 
onstrates the kind of commodity fetishism that facilitates her successful 
circulation as a commercial pop icon. This is aided immeasurably by her 
impressive abilities not only as a musician and performer, but as brand 
manager of her public persona: her trademark tuxedo and pompadour are 
convenient and stable signifiers that function effectively as commercial 
selling points, and are featured with great regularity on the covers of 
fashion and lifestyle magazines. 


THE POLITICS OF WORLD BUILDING 387 


While Monae is always careful to present herself as a rebellious outsider 
from a working-class background, her comments about her own role as a 
celebrity within popular culture do not in any way criticize the capitalist 
system itself: 


Ialso wanted to own something: I’ve always had this thought of owning 
my own label, of being in charge of my words, my art, everything you 
hear. My goal wasn’t to be the most famous person overnight—it was 
to make music on my own terms, develop myself and understand if my 
words were necessary to young people like myselfand to make my family 
proud. (quoted in Shepherd 2013) 


Her words demonstrate the careful cultivation of her own public persona 
as “independent” and “alternative” rather than the product of some global 
entertainment conglomerate. She has indeed been remarkably successful 
at projecting this image; even though she is signed to Sean “Diddy” Combs’ 
Bad Boy Records, itself a subsidiary of media conglomerate Universal Music 
Group, swooning journalists and academics have repeatedly pointed out 
that she has nevertheless managed to retain full creative freedom as an 
independent artist. 

While Monáe’s progressive values and independent-mindedness may 
have had radical and subversive implications in the past, neoliberal capital- 
ism has proved to be more than a little hospitable to this brand of identity 
“alternative’ and 
‘independent’ don’t designate something outside mainstream culture; 


politics. As many critics by this time have pointed out, 


rather, they are styles, in fact the dominant styles, within the mainstream” 
(Fisher 2009, 9). Slavoj Zizek has also argued repeatedly that there is no 
such thing as a “capitalist worldview” (2013, 55): capitalism can absorb and 
contain any movement aimed against it, including feminism and the civil 
rights movements, with very little effort—as long as the existing economic 
and political systems remain unchallenged. Therefore, even if Monde’s work 
were more explicitly anti-capitalist in its content, this too would matter 
little within an industry run by capitalists more than happy—as Lenin 
famously quipped—to sell us the rope with which we would hang them. 
While these contradictions obviously diminish some of the more exagger- 
ated claims concerning Monáe’s semi-messianic image, her unique approach 
to world building together with the inclusive spirit of her neo-Afrofuturist 
vocabulary still puts her at the forefront of politically productive popular 
artists working in fantastic genres. While incorporating Afrofuturism’s 
critical and subversive response to fantastic fiction’s tendency towards 


388 WORLD BUILDING 


racist and white-centric storyworlds, her world building mobilizes not only 
an imaginative form that can challenge and question these traditions, but 
can also engage with them joyfully and productively. Her immaculately 
produced, highly accessible, and commercially viable music is not only 
a collection of branded commodities, but also an explicit celebration of 
“non-productive” human activity. By placing her contagious call to dance, 
enjoyment, and creative collaboration in a storyworld that frames these 
things as acts of political resistance, her music becomes an act of defiance 
within neoliberalism’s “relentless capture and control of time and experi- 
ence” (Crary 2013, 40). While popular culture will quite obviously never 
change the political organization of post-democratic neoliberal capitalism 
by itself, it can still contribute to the vital work of imagining alternative 
futures without simultaneously repressing the very problems it would dis- 
solve (Jameson, 2005, 265). 

On its website, the WondaLand Arts Society expounds its fundamental 
belief in “something futuristic and ancient that we call WISM”, a force 
made up of Love, Sex, Wisdom, Magic, and Wonder. This mantra resonates 
not only with the various cultural movements from the post- 1968 mo- 
ment of emerging countercultures and progressive politics, but also with 
2ist-century radical politics and its insistence on love and hopefulness as 
vital political forces. While moving beyond the essentialist humanism and 
technocratic frameworks of traditional sf, Monáe’s project can be read in 
alignment with Hardt and Negri’s utopian description of “multitudinous 
energies” alongside their adoption of Spinoza’s description of joy: 


The path of joy is constantly to open new possibilities, to expand our 
field of imagination, our abilities to feel and be affected, our capacities 
for action and passion. In Spinoza’s thought, in fact, there is a correspond- 
ence between our power to affect (our mind’s power to think and our 
body’s power to act) and our power to be affected. The greater our mind’s 
ability to think, the greater its capacity to be affected by the ideas of 
others; the greater our body’s ability to act, the greater its capacity to be 
affected by other bodies. And we have greater power to think and to act, 
Spinoza explains, the more we interact and create common relations with 
others. Joy, in other words, is really the result of joyful encounters with 
others, encounters that increase our powers, and the institution of these 
encounters such that they last and repeat. (Hardt and Negri 2009, 379) 


While the affective experience of joy is clearly one of the primary goals 
of Janelle Monae’s blissfully eclectic neo-Afrofuturist soul music, the 


THE POLITICS OF WORLD BUILDING 389 


inclusiveness of her approach to style, genre, and identity does indeed seem 
to facilitate and even organize exactly this kind of“joyful encounters with oth- 
ers”. There may be nothing inherently political in the momentary communal 
release of infectious dance music, but, when experienced in the context of her 
unstable imaginary world, it can provide an entrance point towards more radi- 
cal political perspectives. Both her imaginary world-building practices and 
their real-life community-building counterparts meanwhile give structural 
shape to “the institution of these encounters such that they last and repeat”, 
even in their supposedly low-impact pop-cultural forms. In this sense at least, 
her work does contribute in its own modest way to the development of forms, 
narratives, and identity formations that help us think beyond the confines of 
capitalist realism and neoliberalism’s purely instrumental ontology. 


Works cited 


Bakhtin, Mikhail. 1981. The Dialogic Imagination: Four Essays, edited by Michael 
Holquist; translated by Caryl Emerson and Michael Holquist. Austin: U of Texas 
Press. 

Booker, M. Keith. 2008. “The Politics of Star Trek,” In: The Essential Science Fiction 
Television Reader, edited by J.P. Telotte, 195-208. Lexington: UP of Kentucky. 
Bould, Mark. 2007. “The Ships Landed Long Ago: Afrofuturism and Black SF.” 

Science Fiction Studies 102, 177-86. 

Brandt, Marissa. 2014. “Janelle Mondae’s Liberationist Posthuman Pop.” Difference 
Engines. 5 March. http://www.differenceengines. com/?p=1021. 

Brooker, Will. 2002. Using the Force: Creativity, Community and Star Wars Fans. 
New York: Continuum. 

Collins, Hattie. 2010. “Janelle Monae walks the Tightrope between con- ceptual art 
weirdness and robo-pop stardom.” The Guardian, 10 July. http://www.theguard- 
ian.com/music/2010/jul/og/ janelle-monae-tightrope-archandroid. 

Crary, Jonathan. 2013. 24/7: Late Capitalism and the Ends of Sleep. London: Verso, 

Derrida, Jacques. 1994. Specters of Marx, translated by Peggy Kamuf. New York: 
Routledge. 

Dery, Mark. 1994. “Black to the Future: Interviews with Samuel R. Delany, Greg 
Tate, and Tricia Rose,” In: Flame Wars: The Discourse of Cyberculture, edited by 
Mark Dery, 179-222. Durham: Duke UP. 

Dick, Philip K. 1978. “How to build a universe that doesn’t fall apart two days later,” 
In: The Deoxyribonucleic Hyperdimension. http://deoxy. org/pkd_howabuild.htm. 

Stefan Ekman, Stefan. 2013. Here Be Dragons: Exploring Fantasy Maps and Settings. 
Middletown: Wesleyan UP. 


390 WORLD BUILDING 


English, Daylanne K. and Kim, Alvin. 2013. “Now We Want Our Funk Cut: Janelle 
Monéae’s Neo-Afrofuturism.” American Studies 52.4, 217-30. 

Eshun, Kodwo. 1998. More Brilliant than the Sun: Adventures in Sonic Fiction. 
London: Quartet. 

—. 2003. “Further Considerations of Afrofuturism.” CR: The New Centen- nial Review 
3:2, 287-302. 

Fisher, Mark. 2009. Capitalist Realism: Is There No Alternative? Winchester: Zero 
Books. 

—. 2013. “The Metaphysics of Crackle: Afrofuturism and Hauntology.” Dancecult: 
Journal of Electronic Dance Music Culture 5.2, 32-55. 

Fiske, John. 1987. Television Culture. London: Routledge. 

Gilbert, Jeremy. 2014. Common Ground: Democracy and Collectivity in an Age of 
Individualism. London: Pluto. 

Gilbert, Jeremy; and Pearson, Ewan. 1999. Discographies: Dance Music, Culture and 
the Politics of Sound. London: Routledge. 

Gray, Jonathan. 2010. Show Sold Separately: Spoilers, Promos and Other Media 
Paratexts. New York: New York UP. 

Hardt, Michael; and Negri, Antonio. 2005. Multitude: War and Democracy in the 
Age of Empire. London: Penguin. 

—. Commonwealth. 2009. Cambridge: Harvard UP. 

Jameson, Fredric. 2005. Archaeologies of the Future: The Desire Called Utopia and 
Other Science Fictions. London: Verso. 

Jenkins, Henry. 1992. Textual Poachers: Television Fans and Participatory Culture. 
London: Routledge. 

Johnson, Derek. 2013. Media Franchising: Creative License and Collaboration in the 
Culture Industries. New York: New York UP. 

Lester, Paul. 2014. “Janelle Monae: ‘It’s true. I am part-android.” The Guardian (2 
Apr). http://www.theguardian.com/culture/2014/apr/o2/janelle-monae-inter- 
view-david-bowie-prince. 

Napoli, Philip. 2011. Audience Evolution: New Technologies and the Transformation 
of Media Audiences. New York: Columbia UP. 

Rambsy II, Howard. 2013. “Beyond Keeping It Real: OutKast, the Funk Connection, 
and Afrofuturism.” American Studies 52:4, 205-216. 

Rose, Frank. 2011. The Art of Immersion: How the Digital Generation is Remaking 
Hollywood, Madison Avenue, and the Way We Tell Stories. New York: Norton. 
Royster, Francesca T. 2013. Sounds Like a No-No: Queer Sounds & Eccentric Acts in 

the Post-Soul Era. Ann Arbor: U of Michigan Press. 

Shepherd, Julianne Escobedo. 2013. “Janelle Monae: The Billboard Cover Story.” Bill- 
board, 7 June. http://www.billboard.com/articles/ columns/the-juice/1566282/ 
janelle-monae-the-billboard-cover- story. 


THE POLITICS OF WORLD BUILDING 391 


Steinskog, Erik. 2015. “Michael Jackson and Afrofuturism: H/Story’s Adaptation of 
Past, Present and Future,” In: The Politics of Adaptation: Media Convergence and 
Ideology, edited by Dan Hassler-Forest and Pascal Nicklas, 126-140. Basingstoke: 
Palgrave Macmillan. 

Suvin, Darko. 1979. Metamorphoses of Science Fiction: On the Poetics and History of 
a Literary Genre. New Haven: Yale UP. 

Van Dijck, José. 2013. The Culture of Connectivity: A Critical History of Social Media. 
Oxford: Oxford UP. 

Van Veen, Tobias C. 2013. “Vessels of Transfer: Allegories of Afrofuturism in Jeff 
Mills and Janelle Monae.” Dancecult: Journal of Electronic Dance Music Culture 
5:2, 7-41. 

Wolf, Mark J.P. 2012. Building Imaginary Worlds: The Theory and History of Subcrea- 
tion. London: Routledge. 

Young, Iris Marion. 2010. “The Ideal of Community and the Politics of Dif- ference,” 
In: The Blackwell City Reader, 2nd ed., edited by Gary Bridge and Sophie Watson, 
228-236. London: Wiley-Blackwell, 2010. 

Zizek, Slavoj. 2012. The Year of Dreaming Dangerously. London: Verso. 


About the author 


Dan Hassler-Forest is assistant professor of media studies at Utrecht 
University. His research interests include genre fiction, comics, film and 
television, critical theory, and zombies. He has published books on comics 
studies, the superhero movie genre, and transmedia storytelling. Together 
with Matt Hills, he is the editor ofa book series on participatory culture and 
media convergence for Amsterdam University Press in which the present 
volume was published. 


Index 


absorption 21, 205-212, 244 

adaptation 16, 34, 38, 43, 70, 740, 114, 118-119, 
122-124, 130, 138, 170, 172, 226, 232, 234, 238, 
242, 288-290, 292, 296, 300, 301N, 312-313, 
347, 381 

afrofuturism 377-389 

Amazon Kindle Worlds 18 

animation 16, 22, 97, 102,145, 149-151, 153, 158, 
165, 253-268, 328 

archive 78, 80, 84-86, 362-374, 383 

ARG (Alternate Reality Game) 16, 166, 322, 
327-328 

atlas 20, 77-87, 363 

audience 10, 13, 17, 21-23, 34, 41, 55-56, 58n, 
63, 83, 94, 96-98, 100-102, 104, 114, 122-123, 
125, 132, 136-138, 146, 151, 159n, 167, 169-177, 
191, 193, 204-211, 216, 246n, 256-259, 261, 
267n, 288, 292-293, 295, 298, 300, 308, 345, 
349-350, 353, 357) 369-370, 378-381 

author 13-14, 20, 32, 34, 38, 42-43, 53, 57; 63, 
109-125, 131, 152, 155, 207-210, 232-233, 264, 
289, 308, 312, 314, 325, 351, 363, 382 
authorial agency 347 
authorial principle 348 
authorship 63, 111, 114-115, 132, 134, 139, 155, 

160N, 314, 347, 350, 366-367, 380 

transauthorial 363 


Batman 20, 111-125, 194, 306, 364 

battleworldi 30, 138, 140 

bible 43, 207 

blog 10, 300, 322 

brand 15, 20, 23, 43, 96-97, 99-104, 110-111, 
115-116, 123, 130, 134-136, 167, 288, 291, 294, 
298, 352, 355-356, 363, 377-379, 386-388 


canon 13, 18, 121, 124, 221, 238, 264, 289, 
290-292, 323, 334-351, 353-356, 381 
canonicity 113 

capitalism 351, 379, 386-388 

cartoon 94, 97-103, 253-268 

character 9, 11-12, 14, 19-21, 24, 33-38, 40, 44n, 
48, 62-74, 93-104, 109-125, 129-130, 136-137, 
144, 153, 156-158, 165, 167-175, 177-179, 187, 
189-192, 194-195, 205-209, 211, 216, 218-221, 
224-227, 232-238, 240-243, 246n, 256-258, 
260, 263, 266, 280, 288-289, 291, 294-295, 
299, 300N, 301N, 305-314, 322-323, 325-328, 
330, 332, 336, 3371, 338n, 344, 346-347, 
353-354, 356, 363-364, 367, 377, 381, 384-385 

chunking 209-211, 244 

cinephilia 365-368 

cognitive dissonance 380 


coherence 15,165, 189, 192, 233, 289, 307, 312, 
344, 346-348, 351, 355-357, 378, 381-382 
and consistency 113, 115-117, 120, 306 

coincidence 36, 78, 86n, 196, 198 

collection 39, 46, 77-78, 83-85, 86n, 157, 210, 
233, 3011, 306, 369, 384, 388 

comic books 22, 69, 117, 122, 129-130, 135-137, 
139-140, 169, 171, 216, 218, 220-221, 224-225, 
288, 290-292, 295, 299, 300, 301N, 304-316, 
364, 380 

community 14, 170, 222, 236, 243, 274, 281, 333, 
338n, 348-349, 355-355, 370, 385, 389 

complexity 12-13, 15-16, 18-19, 53-54, 63, 167, 196, 
198-199, 254, 297, 322, 334) 347 

computer 16, 33, 35, 39,146, 149-150, 159n, 187, 
206, 215, 237, 243, 274, 297 

Conan Doyle Estate 110, 118 

consistency 14-15, 21, 57, 113, 115-117, 119-120, 165, 
169-171, 179N, 192, 236, 306, 345, 378 

convergence 11, 13, 18, 22, 93, 131, 140, 145, 159n, 
177, 232, 287-289, 292-297, 300, 3011, 308, 311, 
327, 350, 377, 384 

contradictions 289, 345-346, 348, 357, 382, 387 

copyright 109-125, 135, 289, 353 

corporate 139-140, 282, 295, 351, 379 
author 115-116 
control 120-121, 130 
interests 18 
strategies 23,120 

crossover 95, 129, 138-139, 170, 174, 292, 294, 
306, 352 

crowd sourcing 158 

cultural value 23, 282, 366-367 

curatorial arrangement 374 


database 323, 366, 372 

deconstruction 31-32, 315 

delirium cinema see puzzle films 

democracy 379 

diegesis 14, 194-195, 200, 308, 322, 325, 330, 355 

diegetic 13, 69, 71, 132, 165, 167-168, 190-194, 
198-199, 288, 296, 308, 325-327, 330, 332-333, 
336n, 345, 380 
extradiegetic 33, 310, 326, 330, 336n 
hyperdiegesis 132, 167, 322-334, 343-357 
intradiegetic 33 
metadiegesis 308, 325, 332-333, 336n 
non-diegetic 194-196, 198, 336n 

digital 10, 15, 18, 22-23, 78, 86n, 145-147, 166, 169, 
183, 193, 223, 263, 265, 292-294, 297, 300, 322, 
352, 363, 368-372, 374, 377, 379 

digital economy 144 

digital media divide 366 

digital narcissism 349 


394 


discontinuity 307, 311, 343-357 

Disney 20, 93-104, 115-116, 255-265, 266n, 267n, 
378 

divergence 120, 138, 232 

dolby stereo 193-194 

dream 33, 98, 103-104, 196-198, 257, 259, 
261-262, 328, 3371, 367, 386 

Doctor Who 17, 23, 345-348, 353-356 


e-book 147, 368 

ecology 22,177 

ecosystem 164-180, 322, 334 

establishing shot 189-190, 193 

evolution 24, 85, 166, 169-170, 172, 175-178, 236 
explorer 10-11, 374 

extended seriality 348 


Facebook 10, 39, 282 

fans 9, 11-13, 15-18, 22-23, 38-39, 63, 101, 109-110, 
132, 134, 137, 158, 165, 166-180, 198, 210- 212, 
288, 296-297, 299, 308, 321-338, 343-358, 363, 
365-374, 378 

fan art 17,167,197, 336n 

fanboy auteur 18, 134, 368 

fan fiction 110, 379, 381 

fantasy 9,19, 41, 47-59, 94, 98, 102-104, 146, 155, 
187, 232, 239, 241, 259, 261, 307, 322, 328, 333, 
377-379, 382 

forecasts (on series development) 179 

franchise 11, 13, 15, 19, 22, 38-39, 43, 44N, 97, 110, 
116, 121-122, 124, 129-141, 143-160, 207, 212, 
216, 220, 224, 227, 232-234, 245, 288, 291, 294, 
298, 300, 300N, 343, 345-357, 363, 366, 377, 
379-383 

future 14, 23, 33-34, 36, 51, 54, 57, 59n, 80, 
121-122, 124, 132, 138, 140, 149, 255, 265, 278, 
290-291, 296, 299-300, 380, 382-385, 388 


gate 31,54, 306 
gender 69-70, 133, 273, 384-386 
Greek mythology 10, 43,77 


habitus 371-373 
hegemony 53-54, 134 
counterhegemony 257 
heteroglossia 23, 377-389 
heterotopia 16, 85, 335 
high concept 166, 365, 386 
historicity 383 
horror 47, 176, 215-227, 261, 307, 309, 322, 328 
hybridization 165,176 
hypertopia 16, 335 


identity 10, 16-17, 52, 63, 70-72, 72n, 74N, 83, 133, 
135-136, 279, 290, 307, 312, 332, 3350, 355, 
363, 369-374, 377, 383, 385, 387, 389 

immersion 19, 21-22, 34, 39, 94, 98, 101, 103, 188, 
192, 194, 199, 204-206, 212, 232, 243-245, 312, 
315, 336n, 379 


WORLD BUILDING 


industry 13,15, 34, 38-39, 95-96, 121, 129-141, 
241, 387 
and fandom 348-353 
Chinese 275 
Japanese 143-163 
television 166-167, 175,177 
information architecture 21,177 
intellectual property 96, 110, 115, 117, 130, 355 
interactivity 16, 21,169, 288 
interface 14,149, 168-169, 176, 235, 292 
interpretation 10, 18, 23-24, 52, 55, 58n, 78, 81, 
121, 124, 130, 132, 134, 137-138, 178, 237, 282, 
298, 305, 350, 354-355» 372 
intertextuality 20, 80, 94, 98, 98-101, 103-104, 
124, 238, 289, 307, 310-311, 362-363 
iPad 368, 372 


labyrinth 16, 23, 198, 216, 224-226 
labyrinthine structure 166,196 
linguistic terrain 272-286 


maps 9-10, 17, 20, 77-87, 209, 225, 242, 262, 265 
cognitive 190 

market 23, 102, 114, 121-122, 130, 139, 145, 149-150, 
175-176, 351, 380 

marketing 18, 22, 38, 96, 152, 168, 170, 175, 177, 
291, 295, 300, 381, 386 

marvel 22, 99, 121, 129-142, 171, 287-303, 306, 
308, 314, 378 

mass production 95 

media mix 20, 143-163 

memory 32, 35, 79-80, 85, 205, 209, 274, 276, 
374 
non-memory 355-356 
transmedia 349, 355 

mentalité 369 

metalepsis 22-23, 44N, 304-317, 321-341 

Mickey Mouse 93-107, 259-262, 267n 

mind-game movies see puzzle films 

MMORPG 22, 207, 231-247 

modular content 166, 168 

multiplicity 10, 121-124, 129-142, 168, 354, 
381-382, 386 

multiverse 130-131, 136, 138, 307 

mutations 12,165 

myth 43, 86, 114, 306, 380 

mythology 77, 111, 116, 187, 289-290, 299, 382 


“narractivity” 348-350 

narrative 10, 16, 21-22, 31-46, 47-60, 63, 67, 69, 
72n, 80, 93, 95, 100, 111-112, 114, 132, 140, 151, 
153) 155-156, 209, 211, 220, 226, 289, 291-294, 
296, 298-300, 301N, 305, 307-310, 313, 315, 
322-327, 334, 348, 350, 365-367, 378-379, 
381, 389 
narrative atrophy 165 
narrative ecosystems 164-181, 322, 334 
self-narratives 371, 373-374 
serial narratives 13, 153, 164-181, 328, 334, 

347 


INDEX 


narrative turn 32 
vast narratives 164-181 


negotiation 19, 131-135, 140, 281, 382, 385 

New Criticism 31-32 

non-existent objects 62-75 

novel 14, 16, 34-37, 41-43, 44N, 49-50, 53-55, 
57, 58n, 59n, 85, 114, 117-118, 120, 135, 146, 
150-153, 160n, 169, 204, 209, 216, 233, 235, 
258, 309-310, 313-314, 322, 324, 330, 332, 347, 
349, 352-353, 363-364, 368, 381 


overflow 16, 21, 165, 204-213, 244 


paratextuality 9,15, 42,115, 121, 167, 238, 298, 
306, 345, 351, 353-354, 381 

parody 37,100, 260, 309, 333, 338n 

pastiche 308 

performance 16, 111, 134-135, 172-173, 223, 311, 
326, 378, 384 

photography 78, 83-84, 254, 266n 

places of action 232, 240-247 

playlisting 369 

possible worlds theories 20, 32-33, 50, 323 

postmodernism 272-283, 304-317 

power 23, 41, 54, 121, 129-142, 146, 191, 195, 261, 
265, 274-275, 281-282, 298, 315, 353-354) 370, 
373, 379, 386, 388 

producer 9, 18, 20-21, 97, 123, 134-135, 137, 
139-140, 143-163, 170, 172-175, 177-178, 299, 
313, 344-345, 350-356, 378, 381 
producer-fans 344, 353 

proliferation 9, 11-12, 20, 31-46, 146, 168, 283, 345 

pulp magazine 95, 233 

puzzle films 187-202 


quality tv 347 


reader 16, 22, 34-35, 37, 39-41, 49, 50, 53, 55-57 
80, 95-96, 113, 119, 121, 123, 129, 144, 158, 
188, 200N, 207-208, 210, 238, 242, 276, 280, 
290-291, 306-308, 310-311, 315, 326-327, 330, 
336n, 370, 381 
readership: 95, 314 
e-readers: 368 

realm 9-11, 15-16, 21, 103-104, 111, 132, 141, 155, 
167, 196, 199, 255, 265, 292, 294, 297, 322-323, 
344, 362 

reboot 15, 121, 131, 137-138, 141, 170, 291, 306, 346 

religion 365, 385 

remediation 22, 272, 274 

representamen 280 

resilience 17, 170-171, 173, 177-178, 179n 

retcon 211, 212n, 348 

rhizome 43 

Robin Hood 100, 111, 113, 116 


saturation 21, 204-214, 244 
science-fiction 47-61 


395 


screen 10, 104, 122, 170, 188, 190-193, 205, 216, 
219, 221, 223, 225, 237-238, 241-242, 255-256, 
260-261, 264, 368-369, 374 

screenplay 167-168 

semiotics 19, 308 

serialization 9, 150, 153-154, 156-158, 160n, 176, 
288, 291, 300 

Sherlock Holmes 10, 14, 19-20, 62-76, 109-128, 
289, 300n 

show-runner 123, 134, 328, 346-347, 351, 353, 
355-356 

smartphone 273 

social networks 15, 17, 167, 178-179, 369, 371 

society 11, 16, 34, 79, 99, 239, 240, 273, 293, 352, 
386, 388 

sound 21, 33, 132, 146, 156, 187-203, 208, 238, 258, 
262, 264, 276, 280, 324, 336n 

space 9, 13-14, 16, 18, 20-21, 23-24, 32, 42, 80-82, 
96, 99, 101-103, 112, 130, 165, 168-171, 176-177, 
187-203, 215-230, 233, 242-243, 2451, 254, 
256-257, 267N, 273, 278-279, 282, 305-310, 
322, 335, 3370, 343-344, 350, 354) 379, 381 

spectators 33-37, 168, 188-189, 196, 240, 245, 
256-257, 261, 264, 326-327, 334-335, 369, 374 

storyworld 20, 31-44, 47, 93-104, 111-116, 143, 
156, 158, 172, 224, 246n, 288-293, 295-297, 
299-300, 322, 325, 345, 377-379) 381, 383, 
386, 388 

subcreation 11, 41, 132, 378-380 

subjectivity 23, 82, 272, 363, 374 

system 13, 18, 20-21, 23-24, 35, 38, 42, 58n, 80, 
84, 87n, 124, 133, 149, 160n, 169-171, 173, 
177-178, 189, 194, 198, 215, 234, 245, 246n, 263, 
276, 279-280, 292, 313, 322, 348, 351, 368, 371, 
373, 381, 385, 387 
Nintendo Entertainment System 146 


Tarzan 95-96, 98 

taste 23, 172-175, 177, 323, 363, 365-368, 371 

technology 17, 23, 58n, 78, 149, 191-192, 199, 223, 
260-261, 264, 268, 273-274, 277-278, 282, 
293-294, 363 

television 10, 14, 16, 21, 23, 97, 102, 113, 117, 120, 
122-124, 130, 132, 134-136, 138, 140, 145-150, 
158, 160n, 188, 194, 207-208, 254, 274, 276, 
367-368, 371, 380, 383 
tv series: 164-180, 226, 291-292, 322, 328-338, 

343-357 

theme park 15, 94, 97-98, 101-104, 114, 204, 242 

time 14, 18, 21, 23, 34, 36-37, 40, 42, 67, 272-286, 
69, 80-83, 104, 110, 114-115, 130, 137-138, 
140-141, 165, 168, 170-171, 174-177, 189, 195-196, 
199, 206, 211-212, 216, 226, 236, 240, 242-243, 
246n, 254, 257, 264, 266, 272-286, 306-309, 
344, 346-347, 350-351, 357, 380-381, 385 
time-shifting 149 

transfictionality 14, 38, 288-289, 315, 345-346, 
357 


transmedia 14, 16-18, 20-21, 23-24, 94, 96, 101, 
129, 143, 151-155, 159, 171, 187, 207, 211, 245, 
275, 288, 291, 296, 311, 315, 324, 334, 343, 352, 
356, 362-375, 377-390 
transmedia discontinuity see 
« discontinuity » 

transmedia memory see « memory » 

transmediaphilia 23, 362-375 

transmedia storytelling 12, 15-17, 19, 38, 42, 
47, 111, 131, 144-147, 165, 168, 288, 292, 295, 
300-301, 322, 327, 344, 353, 356 

transmedia supersystems 15 

transmedial worlds 15, 22, 31, 215-230, 
232-234, 236, 246n 

trompe-l'ceil 324-327, 333-334, 336n, 338n 

truth in fiction 62-76 

Twitter 10, 168, 322 


universe 20-21, 48, 53,57, 58n, 66, 71, 74n, 
94, 121-122, 130, 132, 137-140, 166, 168-171, 
174, 176, 187, 216-217, 235, 239, 246n, 278, 
306, 308-309, 322, 324-325, 329, 334, 3370, 
344-346, 350-351, 362-364, 367-386 
Marvel Cinematic Universe see « Marvel » 
universes in expansion 167 

user experience 42, 168-169 


video game 15, 21, 135, 146-147, 149, 151-153, 
156, 169, 188, 207, 215-216, 222-226, 231, 236, 
240-241, 231-247 , 297, 307, 322, 380 

viewer 9, 14, 15-17, 55-56, 83, 113, 119, 121, 124, 
165-171, 188-192, 194, 198-199, 2001, 256-257, 
276-277, 290-291, 294-300, 322-326, 336n, 
367, 369, 381, see also « spectators » 


webisode 168-169, 348 

« what if? » 132,140 

Whoniverse 343-361 

world blocking 356 

world building 11-24, 47, 57, 76, 94-95, 98-99, 
101-104, 111-112, 115, 129, 130-133, 146, 152-153, 
188, 196, 198-199, 211-212, 216, 231, 245, 
275, 278, 287-288, 291-292, 301N, 305, 307, 
343-345) 347, 350-351, 353-357, 363-371, 
373-374) 377-388 

world imagination 272-286 

world making 255, 266n, 273-274, 306, 321-342 

world projecting 354-357 

world sharing 130-135, 138-141, 350-351, 355 

worlds, parallel 130, 139-140, 305 

worldview 10, 13, 152-153, 277, 387 


YouTube 144, 282, 333 
yujing see « linguistic terrain » 


zombie 21, 65-66, 215-130, 306, 311 


